Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2
Technical Description

Doron D Swade
London
March 2020

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2
Science Museum
London

© Board of Trustees of the Science Museum

Contents

Contents
Scope and Purpose

i

List of Illustrations

ii

Acknowledgements

vi

1.

Introduction

1

1.1

Brief History

1

1.2

Sources

4

1.3

Editorial Note

9

2.

3.

4.

5.

Overview

11

2.1

Control Unit

12

2.2

Calculation Section

13

2.3

Output Apparatus

15

Calculation

19

3.1

Giving Off

22

3.2

Warning and Carriage of Tens

33

3.3

Restoring the Value Given Off

42

3.4

Resetting Warning Latches

43

3.5

Pipelining

45

3.6

Resolution of the Layout Design Error

47

Output Apparatus

49

4.1

Transferring Results from Calculating Section

54

4.2

Printing racks

57

4.3

Modifications to Spindle Assembly

69

Printing

71

5.1

Inking

73

5.2

Printing Stroke

80

5.3

Paper Feed

82

5.4

Locks and Modifications to Printing Racks Lock

91

5.5

Cams, Drive and Control

96

Contents

6.

7.

Stereotyping

100

6.1

Travelling Platform

103

6.2

Drive and Control

110

6.3

Formatting Options

132

6.4

Additional Modifications

136

Drive

148

7.1

Main Crank and Ratchet Drive

150

7.2

Uncoupling Clutch: Automatic Halting

153

7.3

Circular Motions

156

7.4

Vertical Motions

168

8.

Framing

194

9.

Build

202

10.

Appendices

212

10.1

Additional Information

212

10.2

Archive Drawings

215

10.3

Construction Drawings

217

10.4

Parts Lists

219

10.5

Timing Diagram

221

11.

Picture Credits

222

Scope and Purpose
This document contains a technical description of Difference Engine No. 2 designed by Charles
Babbage between 1846 and 1849, but not built till the modern era.
The account records the detailed interpretation of Babbage’s designs, and documents the
technical understanding that culminated in the first successful construction, completed in
2002, of an operational Babbage calculating engine built to the original drawings.
This account describes:
1. what the machine does and how it works as decoded from the 19th-century drawings
2. the rationale for design and engineering decisions that informed the modern
construction
3. modifications, precautionary and remedial, made in the physical realisation of the
operational engine.
This account is an historical record of the technical understanding that informed the
preparation of the manufacturing drawings for the 8,000 parts of the machine.
This online version does not include images of the full set 19th-century design drawings. These
are on open access and can be viewed online via the links provided. Excerpts of these
drawings are included in the text so the account is for the most part free-standing. The
manufacturing drawings and their companion parts lists are currently not on open access and
are not included except for the modern Timing Diagram.
There is a companion document, Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: User Manual
(2020), that provides a practical guide for the safe operation, maintenance and repair of the
Engine. The User Manual is largely stripped of the interpretative explanation and design
rationale included here. It is free-standing and is designed to allow responsible persons to
operate the machine without necessary reference to the descriptions that follow here.
At the time of writing two working Difference Engine No. 2s have been completed. These are
not production machines and there are faults that might occur that cannot be anticipated –
the cumulative effects of wear, inadvertent derangement, the effects temperature variations,
and breakages, for example.
Fault-finding, diagnosis and repair require an understanding of the machine and its
mechanisms, and the reasons why it was implemented the way it was. This technical
description is intended to aid such understanding.
i

List of Illustrations

List of Illustrations
Cover
Difference Engine No. 2 (oblique view).
Frontispiece Difference Engine No. 2 (elevation).
1.

Introduction

Page

Fig. 1.1: Charles Babbage (1860).
Fig. 1.2 Mechanical Notation: general template for a single part.

1
7

2. Overview
Fig. 2.1:
Fig. 2.2:
Fig. 2.3:
Fig. 2.4:
Fig. 2.5:
Fig. 2.6:
Fig. 2.7:
Fig. 2.8:
Fig. 2.9:

Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation c. 1848 (A/163).
Difference Engine No. 2, Plan, c. 1848 (A/164).
Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation showing three main subsections (A/163)
Figure wheel. One of 248.
Output Apparatus for printing and stereotyping.
Inked hardcopy (experimental).
Stereotype moulds in Plaster of Paris.
Line-Line format with automatic fly-back (simulation.)
Column-column format with automatic line wrap (simulation).

11
11
12
13
16
16
16
17
17

3. Calculation
Fig. 3.1: Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation showing general layout (A/163).
Fig. 3.2: Timing Diagram (F/385/1) (1848) (detail)
Fig. 3.3: Difference Engine No. 2, Addition and Carriage (A/171).
Fig. 3.4: Difference Engine No. 2, Addition and Carriage (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.5 Figure wheel. One of 248.
Fig. 3.6: Figure wheel supports (top plate removed).
Fig. 3.7: Zero stop drive.
Fig. 3.8: Zero stop sliders.
Fig. 3.9: Sector and Figure Wheels, Elevation (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.10: Sector axis during assembly.
Fig. 3.11: Sector wheels: two views of same wheel.
Fig. 3.12: Figure wheel Lock and top slide block.
Fig. 3.13: Figure wheels lock and bottom plate.
Fig. 3.14: Trial Piece.
Fig. 3.15: Addition Mechanism (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.16: Warning and Carriage Mechanism (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.17: Warning lever, latch and warning limb (placement of figure wheel is indicative).
Fig. 3.18 Carry axis.
Fig. 3.19: Warning mechanism, Elevation (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.20: Reset stops, Elevation (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 3.21: Reset stops and carry levers.
Fig. 3.22: Revised layout showing handing of alternate axes (337 X 26).

ii

19
21
23
24
25
25
26
27
27
28
28
29
29
30
31
34
35
36
37
44
44
47

List of Illustrations

4. Output Apparatus
Fig. 4.1:
Fig. 4.2:
Fig. 4.3:
Fig. 4.4:
Fig. 4.5:
Fig. 4.6:
Fig. 4.7:
Fig: 4.8:
Fig: 4.9:

Output Apparatus, Difference Engine No. 2.
Transfer of results to output apparatus (simulation).
Stereotyping punch wheels, large and small.
Compound racks, pinions, spindles and vertical lock. View from rear (detail).
Transfer of tabular values from figure wheels to horizontal spindles (simulation).
Transfer of tabular values to horizontal spindles (A/176) (detail).
Compound racks, pinions, spindles and vertical printing racks. Oblique view, rear.
Lapped racks (A/A173) (detail) (colour added).
Printing wheels and racks (A/172) (detail).

49
52
53
54
55
55
58
59
62

5. Printing
Fig. 5.1: Apparatus for inked printout (simulation).
Fig. 5.2: Printing apparatus.
Fig. 5.3 Inking and paper system (A/172) (detail).
Fig. 5.4: Inkpot roller drive (before anti-bounce and printing racks lock modification).
Fig. 5.5: Inking feed adjustment.
Fig. 5.6: Spreader roller reciprocating drive.
Fig. 5.7: Floating bearing.
Fig. 5.8: Inking roller counterweight.
Fig. 5.9: Catcher plate (M397).
Fig. 5.10: Release plate (M396).
Fig. 5.11: Anti-bounce mechanism.
Fig. 5.12: Inking roller arms.
Fig. 5.13: Paper take-up drum assembly (A/165) (colour added).
Fig. 5.14: Roller bar and cross-clamp to secure paper ends.
Fig. 5.15: Detachable paper-loading magazine.
Fig. 5.16: Pawl release lever.
Fig. 5.17: Crab-claw lock for stereotyping punch wheels (A/172) (colour added).
Fig. 5.18: Modified printing racks lock drive.
Fig. 5.19: Splint (detail).
Fig. 5.20: Splinted locking bar arms.
Fig. 5.21: Output apparatus cams (part).

71
72
74
75
76
76
77
78
79
79
80
80
82
85
85
86
93
94
95
95
96

6. Stereotyping
Fig. 6.1:
Fig. 6.2:
Fig. 6.3:
Fig. 6.4:
Fig. 6.5:
Fig. 6.6:
Fig. 6.7:

Output Apparatus, Elevation.
Horizontal racks in mounting frame.
Matrix pan and travelling platform.
Small pan frame and rack (inverted).
Split carriage drive (underside).
Column-to-column rack and pinion, Elevation.
Oscillating bars (oblique).

iii

100
102
104
105
108
110
110

List of Illustrations
Fig. 6.8: Travelling platform control (A/166, End View).
Fig. 6.9: Oscillating bars.
Fig. 6.10: Catch pawl leaf spring.
Fig. 6.11: Line and column rocker levers.
Fig. 6.12: Travelling platform control, end-stop (A/166, Plan) (blue colour added).
Fig. 6.13: Line-to-line runaway pawl.
Fig. 6.14: Column-column runaway pawl.
Fig. 6.15: Clutch bar for rewind clutch.
Fig. 6.16 Change-over drop-latch for rewind clutch.
Fig. 6.17: Travelling platform control, Elevation (A/166).
Fig. 6.18: Modified clutch gear.
Fig. 6.19: Modified bobbin and pawls.
Fig. 6.20 Modified rewind clutch assembly.
Fig. 6.21: Stop weight trip lever.
Fig. 6.22: Stop weight release control (A/166, End View) (detail).
Fig. 6.23: Stop weight release control.
Fig. 6.24: Dashpot.
Fig. 6.25: Falling weights (detail).
Fig. 6.26: Stop cord routing.
Fig. 6.27: Stop-pulley reset lever.
Fig. 6.28: Output apparatus release coupling.
Fig. 6.29: Release coupling (view from rear).
Fig. 6.30: Locking lever (view from rear).
Fig. 6.31: Clutch lever (view from front).
Fig. 6.32: Auxiliary crank.
Fig. 6.33: Modifications to output apparatus support framing (during construction).

111
111
112
113
114
115
116
118
119
121
124
125
125
127
128
129
137
138
139
139
141
141
142
142
145
147

7. Drive
Fig. 7.1: Bell crank, even differences (A/163) (detail).
Fig. 7.2: Chapter disc and pointer.
Fig. 7.3: Main drive crank and reduction drive.
Fig. 7.4: Cam stack bevel-gear drive.
Fig. 7.5: Cam-stack thrust bearing (A/160) (colour added).
Fig. 7.6: Uncoupling clutch (A/159, Plan).
Fig. 7.7: Uncoupling clutch (A/159, End View).
Fig. 7.8: Uncoupling clutch mechanism.
Fig. 7.9: Uncoupling clutch scoop lever, framing plate, and pinion drive.
Fig. 7.10: Scoop lever counterweight (view from rear).
Fig. 7.11: Circular motion rack and sector gear. Figure wheel axis (A/171) (detail).
Fig. 7.12: Circular motion rack and sector gear for figure wheel axis.
Fig. 7.13: Miscellaneous loose cams.
Fig. 7.14: Cam stack, oblique rear view.
Fig. 7.15: Phasing gear.
Fig. 7.16: Register pinion (phasing gear removed).
Fig. 7.17: Circular motion bevel gear drive for mirrored carry axes.
Fig. 7.18: Back-to-back helical carry axes (rear view).

iv

149
149
151
152
153
154
154
155
155
156
158
158
159
159
164
164
166
166

List of Illustrations
Fig. 7.19: Bell cranks for axes and figure wheel locks (A/160) (detail) (colour added).
Fig. 7.20: Bell cranks for locks, sector, figure wheel, and warning axes (view from front).
Fig. 7.21: Bell cranks for locks, sector, figure wheel, and warning axes (view from rear).
Fig. 7.22: Lifting levers and release lever (view from front of Engine).
Fig. 7.23: Locking plunger.
Fig. 7.24: Release lever (lowered).
Fig. 7.25: Figure-wheel-lock cam.
Fig. 7.26: Axes counterbalancing springs.
Fig. 7.27: Figure wheel locks counter-balancing springs.
Fig. 7.28: Seventh difference lock collapsible link (view from rear).
Fig. 7.29: Seventh difference lock (detail).
Fig. 7.30: Collapsible link drive (view from front).
Fig. 7.31: Three paired vertical-motion cams.

176
176
178
179
179
180
181
181
182
185
186
186
192

8. Framing
Fig. 8.1: Upper framing plates. View from top.
Fig. 8.2: Additional ties for cam stack frame.

198
200

9. Build
Fig. 9.1: Original setting up procedure for initial values (F/385/1) (March 1848).
Fig. 9.2: Operating manual locks.

206
208

Tables
Output Apparatus Cams: Mechanism Controlled
Release Clutch Status Table
Circular Motion Cams
Vertical Motion Cams
Horizontal Bars: Function

97
144
160
169
177

Portfolio Images
Archive Drawings
Construction Drawings
Parts Lists

v

Acknowledgements
To Sir Neil Cossons and Dame Margaret Weston, former Directors of the Science Museum,
who unhesitatingly backed the project, encouraged us, and took substantial risks in doing so.
For their vision and unfailing support.
To Nathan Myhrvold who funded the construction of the output apparatus for the London
Engine, and the construction of a complete second Engine. For his generosity, enthusiasm,
vision, and support.
To the late Allan G. Bromley who first studied Babbage’s technical designs and proposed in
1985 that Difference Engine No. 2 be built.
To the late Reg Crick to whom this account is limitlessly indebted. For the faultlessly
systematic preparation of manufacturing drawings; for his inventiveness in devising ingenious
solutions to countless design, manufacturing, and mechanical challenges; for taking the lead
role in constructing the London Engine; for his limitless patience and dedication throughout
the project. This volume is dedicated to him.
To the late Barrie Holloway who with Reg Crick specified and built the calculating section of
the London Engine.
To Richard Horton who took on the mantle for the next generation of Babbage engineers, for
assisting in the construction of the output apparatus for the London Engine; for taking the
lead role in the construction of the whole of the second Engine destined for the USA; for his
hall-mark perfectionism and unfailing helpfulness.
To Chris Ward who assisted Richard Horton in the construction of the second machine.
To Michael Wright for his invaluable advice and guidance on 19th-century mechanical
engineering, tool-making and workshop practice.
To Tim Robinson for his masterful care of the American Engine; for the acuity of his
diagnostic, remedial and analytical understanding of the machine; for his decades-long
interest and close study of Babbage’s calculating engines; for heroically reading this account
and providing forensically detailed feedback.

vi

1 Introduction

1. Introduction
The project to build a working Difference Engine No. 2 to original designs was formally
proposed in 1985 by Allan Bromley, an Australian computer scientist. A team at the Science
Museum, London, constructed a full working Engine that ran in its entirety for the first time in
seventeen years after Bromley’s initial proposal. The calculating section was completed in 1991
for the bicentenary of Babbage’s birth. The output apparatus, an integral part of the machine,
which prints and stereotypes results and is described in the original designs, was completed in
March 2002. The project was led by Doron Swade, the author of this volume.
A second Engine was completed in 2008, also by the Science Museum, for the private collection
of Nathan Myhrvold in the USA. This machine was delivered in May 2008 to the Computer
History Museum, Mountain View, California, on loan from Nathan Myhrvold, for public display
and demonstration there. The Engine was publicly demonstrated on a near-daily basis for
some seven years – until January 2016 when it returned to Myhrvold’s private collection. The
two Engines were made to be identical. There are minor differences but none of these are
material to the logical principles of operation or to its physical realisation. The content of this
account draws on detailed analysis of the original design drawings and manuscripts dating from
1846-9, the preparation of modern manufacturing drawings that specify the 8,000 parts, and
the construction and subsequent operation, over many years, of the two engines.

1.1 Brief History of Difference Engine No. 2
Genesis Episode
Charles Babbage (1791-1871) devoted the best
part of his life to designing mechanical
calculating engines. The genesis of his efforts is
captured in the well-known vignette in which
Babbage and his friend John Herschel were
checking astronomical tables calculated by
hand. Exasperated by the number of errors
Babbage recalls that he exclaimed ‘I wish to
God these calculations had been executed by
steam’. ‘Steam’ can be read as a metaphor for
the infallibility of machinery, as well as a
solution to the problem of supply: his
calculating engine was seen as ‘a machine for

1

Fig. 1.1: Charles Babbage (1860).

1 Introduction

manufacturing tables’ that would produce error-free tables as and when needed.1
Babbage’s mechanical epiphany occurred in 1821, probably in London. Babbage was
seized by the prospects of mechanising calculation and, more generally, of mechanising
mathematics.
Difference Engine No. 1
Babbage launched himself into the design of his first calculating engine. He hired a leading
toolmaker, Joseph Clement, who set about making the 24,000 parts required for the
whole machine. Babbage called his machine a Difference Engine, so-called because of the
principle on which it was based – the method of finite differences. Practical attempts to
build what later became known as Difference Engine No. 1 were abandoned in March
1833 when, after a decade of design and development, and substantial government
funding, Clement downed tools and fired several of his workmen following an unresolved
dispute over compensation for moving his workshop closer to Babbage’s home.
During the dispute Babbage was deprived of his drawings and engine parts. Forcibly
distanced from the nuts and bolts of construction he revisited some of his earliest ideas on
calculating engines and conceived of a vastly more ambitious machine, his Analytical
Engine – a general purpose digital programmable computing machine. He abandoned the
first Difference Engine and devoted the next thirteen years to developing and refining the
new designs.
Difference Engine No. 2 and the Analytical Engine
In 1846, with the major work on the Analytical Engine design done, Babbage began a
design for a new difference engine, Difference Engine No. 2. The advanced functions
envisaged for the Analytical Engine had made new demands on mechanical logic and
design. The mechanisms for direct multiplication and division, for example, required an
intricacy and complexity well beyond those for the repeated additions in the Difference
Engine. He later wrote:
... in labouring to perfect this Analytical Machine of greater power and wider range of
computation, I have discovered the means of simplifying and expediting the mechanical
process of the first Difference Engine.2

1

Babbage, B. H. (1872). Babbage's Calculating Machine or Difference Engine, Science and Art
Department. Reprinted in Campbell-Kelly, M., Ed. (1989). The Works of Charles Babbage.
London, William Pickering, Vol. 2, pp. 223-233, p. 226.
2
C. Babbage to Lord Derby, 8 June 1852. Babbage, C. (1864). Passages from the Life of a
Philosopher. London, Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts & Green, p. 104.

2

1 Introduction

The design of Difference Engine No. 2 benefited directly from the work on the Analytical
Engine. The need for fast execution times led him to devise more efficient techniques for
simple addition, not least to make room in the timing cycle for multiplication and division
that were irreducibly more time-consuming, relying as they did on sequences of repeated
operations. Meeting these demands extended his capabilities to new levels of
sophistication, economy, and elegance.
Babbage is explicit on the influence of the Analytical Engine on the design of Difference
Engine No 2. He wrote that he ‘proposed to take advantage of all the improvements and
simplifications which years of unwearied study had produced for the Analytical Engine’.3
This was no false claim. Difference Engine No. 2 calls for some three times fewer parts than
Difference Engine No. 1 for similar calculating capacity – 8,000 parts compared to 24,000.
There is a further direct connection between Difference Engine No. 2 and the Analytical
Engine: the two machines share the same design for the output apparatus that prints an
inked hardcopy record of results and impresses the same results into soft material in trays
to create stereotype moulds from which printing plates were to be made.
The main drawings for Difference Engine No. 2 are some twenty in number and date from
1847-9. The set represents the most complete description of any of Babbage’s engines.
There is no evidence that any are missing or spoiled, and the drawings seem to have been
spared Babbage’s inveterate tinkering. It seems that for once at least Babbage was
content to leave well enough alone. The design for Difference Engine No. 2 is one of
elegant economy and simplicity executed by someone whose mastery of mechanical logic
had already met greater challenges. The set of drawings was the primary source of
technical information for the construction of the Engine.
Babbage offered the designs for the new difference engine to the government in 1852 in a
letter to the Prime Minister, Lord Derby. There was evidently a legacy of discomfort from
the failed first Difference Engine project some twenty years earlier: he wrote that in
offering the designs of the new Engine to the government of the day he felt that he had
‘discharged to the utmost limit every implied obligation I originally contracted with the
country’.4 The offer was rebuffed and Babbage retreated into bitterness and
recriminations. No attempt was made to construct the machine in Babbage’s lifetime.
The plans were kept, and largely ignored, in a specially built wooden case, for the next
hundred years.

3 Ibid., p. 97.
4 Ibid., p. 107.

3

1 Introduction

On his death in 1871, Babbage bequeathed the contents of his workshop and his drawings
to his son, Henry Prevost, who loaned the archive to the Science Museum in 1878. The
surviving physical material and drawings including those for Difference Engine No. 2, were
formally donated to the Science Museum 1905.
A Modern Sequel
The Australian computer scientist, Allan Bromley, revived interest in the machine in the
late 1960s when he began a detailed study of Babbage’s engine designs. In 1985 he
proposed to the Science Museum that Difference Engine No. 2 be built in time for the
bicentenary, in 1991, of Babbage birth.
The project to build the Engine was led by the author of this account, Doron Swade, who
was Curator of Computing at the time of Bromley’s proposal. Metal was first cut for an
experimental trial piece in December 1986, one hundred and forty years after the designs
left Babbage’s drawing board.

1.2 Sources
Babbage left no written explanation of his design, nor did he leave anything other than
slight fragments in the way of operational instructions. His notorious thrift in the provision
of textual description is true of his published writing as it is of the extensive manuscript
archive that survives. His journals, called Scribbling Books or Notebooks, have intermittent
relevant entries made during the design, and he left a short note on the procedure for
setting up a calculation reproduced in Fig. 9.1 (p. 206). But these records are few,
fragmentary and unsystematic.
Babbage’s original set of drawings for Difference Engine No. 2 consists of twenty main
views (average size 1000 mm by 600 mm), a small number of derivative tracings, a few
superseded designs, and Notations using a language of signs and symbols of his own
devising. The set of drawings is believed to be complete: there is no evidence of drawings
being missing. The drawings and Notations represent the only original technical
description of the engine. They are a free-standing source from which Babbage’s
intentions, logical and mechanical, had to be decoded and reconstructed with practically
no textual explanation to assist this process. The main data source was the twenty main
views: little reference was made to the derivative tracings or the superseded designs, or to
the Notations other than to the timing diagram that is part of the notational description.

4

1 Introduction

The drawings and Notations collectively constitute a description of the engine as Babbage
intended it to be: they are sufficiently detailed to describe the shape and nominal size of
individual parts and their physical relationship, and from this it was possible, with small
exception, to decode intended function. However, for all the richness they contain, the
drawings are not ‘working drawings’ in that they are not sufficiently detailed to provide a
full specification necessary for the manufacture of parts. No information is provided in the
originals as to choice of materials, methods of manufacture, requisite precision, or finish.
In this respect the drawings provide a schematic description of logic and function,
comprehensive in itself, but insufficiently detailed to serve directly as a specification for
manufacture.
The drawings are deficient in other respects: they contain dimensioning inconsistencies
(the same parts are shown differently sized in different views, for example); there are
instances of omitted devices, as well as redundant assemblies. There is one screaming
error that would prevent the basic addition mechanism from working. Babbage made no
practical attempt to construct the engine, and the deficiencies for the most part represent
the gap between an advanced design, arrested in an incomplete stage of engineering
development, and a final working mechanical entity. The gap is one of engineering
completeness rather than logical or operational principle: none of these practical
deficiencies compromises the validity of the basic logic, design or intended function of the
machine.
The manufacture of parts required full working drawings including detailed piece-part
drawings specifying shape, dimensions, materials, tolerances and finish for each of the
8,000 parts. In addition, parts lists specifying quantities of individual components were
needed, as well as layouts and general assembly drawings detailing the physical
relationship of assembled parts.
Using Babbage’s original set of drawings as the primary references 219 new A0 size
drawings were produced that fully specify each of the 8,000 parts. These piece-part
drawings, as well as assembly drawings and parts lists provide the necessary detail for
manufacture. Which parts where to be made from bronze, cast iron or steel, methods of
manufacture, finish and tolerancing were informed by expert curatorial advice based on
deep knowledge of nineteenth-century practice, of Babbage’s other engine designs, and of
the surviving relics of his experimental assemblies. Composition analysis of contemporary
‘gunmetal’ was carried out to establish an appropriate grade of bronze. Dimensioning
inconsistencies were resolved, incompletenesses in the design remedied, and
modifications made to correct layout errors, omissions and redundant mechanisms.

5

1 Introduction

Finally, the manufacturing drawings are informed by insights acquired during the course of
construction, bringing the machines to a working state, and subsequent maintenance. The
modern drawings include all modifications made to date, both precautionary and remedial
i.e. the manufacturing drawings were updated to record modifications made during
construction and testing, and following use and frequent demonstration.
The guiding principle throughout was authenticity. Care was taken to ensure that no part
was specified to a higher precision than is known from measurement to have been
achievable in Babbage’s time. Metals were either compositionally matched with surviving
examples left by Babbage in the case of bronze, and in all other instances only materials
known to have been used by Babbage (cast iron and steel) of a grade available to Babbage,
were specified with one non-essential exception – the grade of steel used for two impact
teeth on a phasing gear (see p. 165). No attempt was made to replicate contemporary
manufacturing methods, machine tools, or workshop practices. Modern manufacturing
techniques were used including computer-aided manufacture but with uncompromising
adherence to precision no higher than was demonstrably achievable by Babbage as
evidenced in the physical relics of his own efforts.
The Mechanical Notation
Babbage used three descriptive forms to specify the Engine and its operation:
1. Mechanical Drawings show the shape and size of parts, and their spatial relationship
to one another. (Forms).
2. Symbol Strings describe the causal chains of action of concatenated parts. (Trains).
3. Timing Diagrams show when parts move in the calculating cycle and how motions are
orchestrated in timed relation to one another. (Cycles).
The three descriptive genres, Forms, Trains, and Cycles, collectively constitute the
Mechanical Notation, a language of signs and symbols Babbage used both to describe and
specify his machines, and as a design aid to optimise timing, remove redundancy and
manage, symbolically, otherwise unmanageable detail at component level.5

5

When he formalized the scheme in a publication in 1856, Babbage’s son called timing diagrams
‘Cycles’. Babbage himself was more fluid and had earlier variously referred to a timing diagram
as the Notation of Periods, Notation of Units (General and Special), and Cycles of Units.

6

1 Introduction

The Forms depict the shape and size of parts and their organisation into mechanisms. They
have the form of conventional mechanical drawings and use familiar drafting conventions
of plan views, front and end elevations, and sectional views in mainly third angle
projections. There is nothing radical or revolutionary in these. They conform to
contemporary representational conventions and capture what is essentially spatial
relation.
Trains are diagrams that describe the complete causal chain from the first mover to the
end result. They show the path of the transmission of motion by parts acting on other
parts using the symbols and syntactical rules devised by Babbage for this purpose.
Cycles convey the orchestration of motions of individual parts into a functioning whole.
For this a new set of notational conventions was introduced. Annotations at the head or
tail of an arrow indicate linear or circular motion, whether rotation is positive or negative,
and whether or not the motion depicted returns the part to its rest position. Other
conventions indicate whether the motion is conditional or unconditional, continuous or
intermittent and the time window in which the motion may or may not occur.
In the notational
scheme each part is
assigned a capital
letter of the alphabet
in one of a number
of typefaces –
italicised letters for
moving parts and
upright letters for
fixed framing pieces,
and a variety of
typeface families are
used including
Etruscan, Roman,
and Script. Each

Fig. 1.2: Mechanical Notation: general template for a single part.

letter identifying a
part has up to six indices – superscripts and subscripts.6 Four of the indices are numerical –
the index of identity, index of circular position, of linear position, and an index to extend
the use of a typeface family in the event of running out of letters. The four numerical

6

Swade, Doron. "'Photographing the Footsteps of Time': Space and Time in Charles Babbage's
Calculating Engines." Space, Time, and the Limits of Human Understanding. Ed. Shyam
Wuppuluri, Giancarlo Ghirardi: Springer, 2017. 417-27.

7

1 Introduction

indices indicate the spatial relationship to other parts and which parts form functional
groups. The two non-numerical indices are the Sign of Form, and Sign of Motion. The Sign
of Form gives functional specificity to the part annotated. It indicates the species of part –
rack, gear wheel, cam, pinion, arm, spring, crank, handle etc. – using symbols that are
partial pictograms indicating generic function. The Sign of Motion is also part pictogram
and indicates the nature of motion – linear, circular, curvilinear, reciprocating, for
example.
Individual parts in the mechanical drawings are annotated with alphabetic identifiers and a
selection of the non-numerical indices. The Trains consist of the self-same identifying
letters in the mechanical drawings combined into descriptive statements using the
syntactical conventions of the notational language. In the Trains, in addition to the
numerical indices, the two non-numerical indices are extensively used to indicate class of
part and the nature of motion (see, for example, BAB/A/178/1-5).
Cycles convey the orchestration of motions of individual parts into a functioning whole.
For this a new set of notational conventions was introduced. Motion is indicated by arrows
and variants of arrow heads, tails and shaft signify different aspects of motion: linear or
circular, lifting or lowering, whether rotation is positive or negative, and whether or not
the motion depicted returns the part to its rest position. Other conventions indicate
whether the motion is conditional or unconditional, continuous or intermittent and the
time window of possible occurrence (see, for example F/385/1 reproduced in part in Fig.
3.2, p. 21).
No significant use of the Trains was made in decoding the drawings for the purposes of
this project. The main sources from which the operation of the machine was decoded,
and from which Babbage’s intentions were reverse-engineered, are the set of mechanical
drawings (Forms) and the timing diagram (Cycles).
In this account extensive use is made of the same letters as in the original drawings to
identify parts described in the explanatory text. The significance of the indices is, in
general, not explained. On the few occasions where the Notation is relevant to an
understanding of function, these are explained, but no comprehensive treatment of the
Notation is given here. The letter or symbol for a part, with its notational indices, can be
regarded simply as a non-descriptive identifier without grave penalty.
The reason that the symbolic language was not used to any great extent to inform our
understanding of the design is that the Mechanical Notation had not been fully decoded at
the time the drawings were first interpreted for the purposes of this project. Since then
the Mechanical Notation has been the subject of a special study and in revising the
account for this publication the Notation was used to revisit and verify decisions made
8

1 Introduction

without its earlier benefit. Where the Notation is helpful in resolving hitherto unresolved
ambiguities in our original interpretation, these are noted.

1.3 Editorial Note
An express purpose of the documentation process was to capture the team’s
understanding of the design, to record the decisions taken in the preparation of the
manufacturing drawings, and finally to document new insights and engineering
modifications made during construction and commissioning. It was envisaged that the
account would be of value as an historical record as well as of significant use for faultfinding, diagnostics and remedial action for those who follow.
The account that follows supersedes the print-version published in 1996: Doron Swade,
‘Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: Technical Description’, Science Museum
Papers in the History of Technology, No. 5.
The 1996 version was written after the calculating section of the London engine was built
but before construction of the output apparatus (hard-copy printer and stereotyping
apparatus) was attempted. The 1996 account incorporates an analysis and description of
the design of the output apparatus including precautionary modifications, but it does not
include modifications made, insights gained, and lessons learned in the course of
constructing the output apparatus, bringing it to working order, experimental running and
maintenance. The account that follows here incorporates all technical content in the 1996
description which has been reworked and substantially expanded to include new material
following the successful completion of the output apparatus in 2002, a date that marks the
first successful completion in its entirety of a working Babbage calculating engine.
The 1996 description was in the nature of an interpretative companion to Babbage’s
original design drawings i.e. the text assumed access to the original drawings, or copies
sufficiently fine to reproduce the detail of the small annotations that abound. The 1996
print document included a set of A4 drawings reduced from the large format of the
originals. While the A4 drawings were adequate for much of the explanation, the fine
detail, especially the minute penmanship of the Notations, did not survive reduction. Since
then the original reference drawings, manufacturing drawings and parts lists have been
digitised. The full set of archive drawings are available online via the links given. The
manufacturing drawings are not yet in the public domain. Improvements in digital
photography have also allowed more generous use of images for illustration than was
possible in the 1990s.
9

1 Introduction

So that the text can be at least to some extent free-standing, parts of the digitised
drawings have been excerpted and incorporated in the descriptions as illustrations – this
to spare the disruption and interruption of attention involved in referring to drawings
whether digital or print. Where reference is made to parts or mechanisms of which there
is no substantial discussion, or the mention is in passing, the relevant drawings-excerpts
have not been incorporated in the text and the full drawing will need to be referred to.
References are made to manufacturing drawings particularly in the discussion of
modifications, and also to describe aspects of the general assembly. These manufacturing
drawings are not yet on public access. Since the principal purpose of this account is to
chronicle our interpretation of the original twenty 19th-century drawings, no
comprehensive description of the modern drawings is undertaken here but reference to
them is made by way of supplementary description.
The text is also illustrated with digital photographs of parts of the built machine. I confess
to a methodological discomfort here. A purist approach would be to present, as an act of
scholarly transparency, the analysis and interpretation of the drawings as the rationale
and justification for the physical implementation. Using images of the outcome to
illustrate the analysis would therefore seem to beg the question (in the original, logically
circular, sense of this phrase) i.e. the circularity entailed by using the outcome as part of
the justification for the process by which the outcome was achieved.
When the documentation project was conceived the Technical Description was envisaged
as a text-based account largely in the nature of an archival companion to the physical
drawings. But with advances in digital photography the temptations to use images of built
parts to illustrate the analysis proved too strong to resist. These images are used purely to
aid understanding and it is hoped that their use will not in any way lessen critical
examination of the interpretation of the original drawings presented here.
Countless times during this project we lamented Babbage’s reticence in providing any
written explanation of his drawings, intentions, and designs. For those studying the
Engine, now or in the future, it is hoped that the account that follows will, at least to some
extent, spare us similar censure.
Doron Swade
London
February 2020

10

2 Overview

2. Overview

Difference Engine No. 2 automatically calculates and tabulates a class of mathematical
functions (polynomials), prints results in inked hardcopy, and impresses results in trays of soft
material to create moulds (stereotypes) for the production of printing plates. The Elevation
(Fig. 2.1) shows the overall form of the Engine.

Fig. 2.1: Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation, c. 1848
(A/163).

The whole machine measures eleven feet long and seven feet high with the depth varying
between eighteen inches and four feet (Fig. 2.2). The built Engine weighs 5 tonnes and consists
of a total of 8,000 parts made of bronze, cast iron, or steel.

Fig. 2.2: Difference Engine No. 2, Plan, c. 1848 (A/164)

11

2 Overview

The Engine calculates and tabulates any 7th-order polynomial to thirty one decimal places, and
prints inked hard copy and stereotypes to thirty decimal places. It is operated by turning the
crank by hand (Figs. 2.1, 2.2) and each full cycle of the Engine produces the next result in the
table.
The Engine has three main sections bolted together to form a monolithic whole:
1. Control Unit
2. Calculating Section
3. Output Apparatus
Results
column

1st Difference
column

Printing
Stereotyping
apparatus
apparatus
Output
apparatus

4th Difference
column

Calculating
section

7th Difference
column

Control
unit

Fig. 2.3: Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation showing three main subsections (A/163).

2.1 Control Unit

The Control Unit consists of the main crank and the cam stack. The Engine is operated by
turning the crank by hand. The crank drives a set of twenty-eight cams (fourteen pairs)
arranged in a vertical stack shown immediately alongside the crank. The rotating cams

12

2 Overview

drive and synchronise the lifting, turning and sliding motions required by the calculating
mechanism.
The crank handle also drives the printer and stereotyping apparatus through a long shaft
running the length of the underside of the machine and driven by a large bevel gear on
the underside of the cam stack (Figs. 2.1, 2.3).
The output apparatus has its own local control unit in which a vertical set of cams controls
the internal operations and timing of the printing and stereotyping mechanisms.

2.2 Calculating Section
The Calculating Section consists of two parts: the upper section features eight columns of
figure wheels; the lower section consists of the drive links, levers, racks and pinions that
produce the lifting and turning motions for the vertical axes. The mechanisms are driven
by the rotation of the cams in the cam stack. The calculating section and control unit
together consist of 4,000 parts.
Each of eight 31-digit numbers (seven

Drive
nibs

differences and the tabular value), is
represented by a column of thirty-one
figure wheels, one for each digit of a
multi-digit number. The number value of
each digit is represented by the angular
rotation of a figure wheel. Each wheel has
forty teeth with the pitch of one tooth

Warning
nibs

Barrel

Fig. 2.4: Figure wheel. One of 248.

corresponding to a single decimal number,
0 to 9. So each figure wheel has four identical runs of ten decimal numbers engraved on
the barrel and which can be read off directly. (Fig. 2.4).
In each column the least significant digit is at the bottom, the most significant digit is at
the top i.e. units are represented by the lowermost figure wheel, tens the next wheel up
and so on. The right-most column holds the value of the 7th difference; the 6th difference is
on the column immediately adjacent to the left and so on. The tabular result appears on
the left-most column, the results column (Fig. 2.3)Error! Reference source not found..
Digit values of results and differences can be read directly from the figure wheels.
Immediately above each wheel is an engraved cursor facing front, that acts as a pointer.
The cursors are used to read digit values when setting up initial values at the start of a

13

2 Overview

calculation, verifying correct operation and fault-finding. Throughout this account the
front of the Engine consistently refers to the view of the machine that allows digit values,
indicated by the cursor, to be read from the figure wheels (See User Manual (2013),
Calculating Section, Fig. 2.6, p. 10.)
The 7th, 5th, 3rd, and 1st difference columns are the odd difference columns. The 6th, 4th,
and 2nd difference columns are the even difference columns.
In the case of a full 7th-order polynomial, for each calculating cycle, the Engine is required
to add the value on the 7th difference column to the value on the 6th difference column,
the 6th to the 5th and so on with information moving from right to left as seen from the
front of the Engine, as shown in Figs. 2.1, 2.3. The result of these additions, the tabular
value, appears on the last column on the left, the results column. However, the Engine
does not carry out the addition of differences in this strictly serial way. Instead values of
the four odd differences columns are added to the even difference columns in the first
half-cycle and the even differences are added the odd differences in the second half cycle
in a process akin to ‘pipelining’ in present day systems. The operation and rationale for
this sophistication is described in 3.5 ‘Pipelining’, p. 45.
The initial values for a calculation are entered by hand using a fixed sequence of steps, the
setting up procedure. Initial values are entered on the figure wheels from a pre-prepared
table calculated specifically for the function being tabulated. After setting initial values,
each subsequent cycle of the Engine produces each next value in the table of the function
being tabulated.
The tabular value on the results column is automatically transferred to the output
apparatus on the left for printing and stereotyping (Fig. 2.3). Only thirty of the thirty-one
digits of the result are transferred to the printer so digit thirty (the highest value digit) will
not be printed or stereotyped.
The machine can calculate and tabulate any polynomial up to the 7th order using repeated
addition according to the method of finite differences. For polynomials of order less than
seven, the higher order difference columns are set to zero and play no part.
Integrity of the Calculation
Babbage’s initial motivation for mechanising tabulation was to eliminate the risk of error
in the manual production of printed mathematical tables. Machines are not inherently
error-free in virtue of being mechanical i.e. they are not immune to malfunction,

14

2 Overview

derangement, wear or breakage, and the designs feature a variety of security devices –
mechanisms to prevent derangement, for error detection and correction – to ensure the
integrity of the calculation. Babbage boasts that with these security devices the Engine
will break, jam but never deceive.1

The Engine is a decimal digital machine: it uses the familiar decimal number
system, and it is digital in the sense that only discrete integers are legitimate
representations of number values. The measures for error prevention, detection
and self-correction rely on the feature that only discrete intervals of a part’s
motion are valid representations of number values.
The basic calculating unit, a figure wheel, is not inherently digital: it has a fixed
number of teeth with each tooth-interval representing a single integer, but the
angular position of a wheel is not discretised, that is, the wheels can take up any
rotational position between integral whole numbers, and are capable of
continuous motion with all transitional states between integers physically viable.
This is unlike an electronic flip-flop that flips from one state to another when a
threshold is exceeded and in which the transitional states are not stable. A
toothed figure wheel at rest in an intermediate position between two number
values is indeterminate and the occurrence of this state during a calculation signals
that the integrity of the calculation has been compromised.
Digital operation is achieved by locking and control mechanisms rather than any
inherent discreteness in the motions of the basic mechanical elements or
mechanisms. Locking and security devices to ensure digital control are essential
features of the design.

2.3 Output Apparatus
The output apparatus (Fig. 2.5) automatically typesets results, prints an inked copy of each
result on a paper roll, and produces stereotype moulds by impressing the results into soft
material (wet Plaster of Paris, for example) held in trays (Figs. 2.6, 2.7).

1

Babbage, C., On the mathematical powers of the calculating engine, 1837. Campbell-Kelly, M., ed. The
Works of Charles Babbage. 1989, William Pickering: London, Vol. 3, p. 39.
15

2 Overview

Inking
system
Paper
roll
Travelling
platform

Falling
weight
Rewind
handle

Falling
weight

Pattern
wheels
End-of-page
trip cradle

Auxiliary
crank

Fig. 2.5: Output Apparatus for printing and stereotyping.

The apparatus consists of two sections (Fig. 2.3): the printing apparatus, which includes
the inking apparatus, paper roll, and printing wheels; and the stereotyping apparatus
immediately below it. The whole apparatus consists of 4,000 parts, is bolted to the main
frame of the calculating section (Fig. 2.5) and is an integral part of the original design.
The trays are fixed to travelling platforms that automatically position the them under the
punch wheels to receive each new result. One of the trays is larger than the other and
there are two sets of punch wheels with different font sizes, one set for each tray. Punch

Fig. 2.6: Inked hardcopy (experimental).

Fig. 2.7: Stereotype moulds in Plaster of Paris.

16

2 Overview

wheels are lowered once each cycle to create an impression of results, and the resulting
tablet is used as a mould to make a printing plate (Fig. 2.7).
The format of the stereotyped results can be programmed: combinations of line height,
number of lines, margin widths, and number of columns can be preset using pattern
wheels (Fig. 2.5). Blank lines can be left between groups of lines for ease of reading.
The stereotyping apparatus can impress results across the page (column-to-column) or
down the page (line-to-line). In the case of column-to-column format, line wrap at the end
of the line is automatic. Similarly, in the case of line-to-line format, fly-back to the top of
page at the end of a column of results is automatic.
Fig. 2.8: Line-to--line format
with automatic fly-back.

Fig. 2.9: Column-to-column
format with automatic line
wrap.

The output apparatus is directly coupled to the calculating section and each new thirtydigit tabular value is transferred automatically from the results column, via a system of
racks, pinions and spindles, to the output apparatus for printing and stereotyping. There is
no printing overhead i.e. each result is printed and stereotyped during the calculating
cycle that generates it with no buffering or any additional time taken.
The output apparatus prints and stereotypes thirty of the thirty-one digits of the result.
The highest value digit, the topmost figure wheel in the result column, is not transferred
and therefore not printed or stereotyped.
The whole output mechanism is driven from a main drive shaft running along the
underside of the Engine from the control unit (Fig. 2.1). There is a separate set of cams
17

2 Overview

local to the output apparatus that drives the internal motions of parts and orchestrates
the timing of operations for printing and stereotyping.
A feedback mechanism from the output apparatus to the calculating section automatically
halts the Engine at the end of a stereotyped page to prevent overrun. End-of-page halting
ensures that the first new result on the fresh tray is the next result in the sequence and
that no results are lost in the changeover.
The travelling platforms bearing the two stereotyping trays are driven by two sets of
falling weights. One set (on the right in Fig. 2.5) drives the line-to-line movement. The set
on the left drives the column-to-column movement.
When stereotyping down the page (line-to-line) the line-to-line falling weight is
automatically rewound and a new column can be started without interruption. At the end
of a full page the engine halts and the column-to-column falling weight is rewound by
hand using the rewind handle (Fig 2.5). When stereotyping across the page the column-tocolumn falling weight is rewound automatically and at end-of-page the line-to-line falling
weight is rewound by hand.

18

3 Calculation

3.

Calculation

The mathematical principle on which the Engine is based is the method of finite differences.
This method requires the successive addition of the highest order difference to the next lower
order difference, which is itself added to the next lower order difference and so on, until the
first difference is added to the tabular column to produce the next value of the expression
being tabulated. The highest order function that can be tabulated is a 7th-order polynomial.
Mapping this onto the Engine (Figs. 2.3, 3.1) the result (tabular value) appears on the leftmost column, the one closest to the output apparatus. The 7th difference is held on the rightmost column and the first difference on the column immediately to the right of the results
column. The digit wheel at the bottom of a column represents the least significant digit
(units), tens are the next decade up, hundreds the next, and so on.
There are four odd-difference columns (7th, 5th, 3rd, and 1st) and three even difference columns
(6th, 4th, 2nd differences) plus the results column which has the configuration of an even
difference column. Whether a column holds an odd or even difference is significant because
of the way the timing cycle is phased: the Engine uses a more sophisticated sequence than
strict serial addition of one column to the next (see 3.5 ‘Pipelining’, p. 45).

Fig. 3.1: Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation showing general layout (A/163).

19

3 Calculation

For calculations requiring seven orders of difference all eight columns are active and the 7th
difference column holds the constant difference. In situations in which there are fewer than
seven differences the active columns are those closest to the tabular value column, and
columns closest to the drive handle are inactive, that is to say, all thirty-one figure wheels in
each of the unused columns column are set to zero. The internal axes of the inactive columns
are still driven but with values set to zero they have no effect on the calculation. For a pure
7th-order polynomial the 7th difference value is constant. In cases where fewer than seven
differences are used, the highest order difference column (the right-most active column) holds
the constant difference.
The addition of a numbers as implemented in the Engine consists of four distinct operations:
1. Giving-off -

the process by which the number on one figure wheel is added to the
adjacent (lower) difference figure wheel in the column alongside. The
wheel giving-off reduces to zero and the number on the adjacent
wheel is increased by the number given off.

2. Warning -

the action of setting a warning latch that a carriage is still outstanding
when a number value on the receiving wheel exceeds 9 during givingoff. The latch warns that after giving-off, the next higher decade needs
to be incremented by one unit to complete the addition.

3. Carriage -

the carriage of tens in which a number value on a figure wheel is
incremented by one, if the figure wheel immediately below it is
warned.

4. Restoration - restoring the number given off for use in the next calculating cycle.

Timing and Phasing
The timing sequence for a full calculating cycle (two half-cycles) is described in an original
Timing Diagram F/385/1 (Fig. 3.2).
Babbage divided the calculating cycle into fifty time units so each of Babbage’s units
corresponds to 7.2° in a 360° cycle. The timing units are shown numbered in the left-hand
column in the Timing Diagram (Fig. 3.2). The columns across the top are captioned with the
names of the moving parts active in the calculation and their notational identifiers: Sector
Axis, Sectors, Figure Wheels and Figure Wheel Axis, Unwarning Axis (called Warning Axis in

20

3 Calculation

this account), Carrying Levers, and Carry Driving Axis (called Carry Lever Axis, or simply Carry
Axis, in this account).

Fig. 3.2: Timing Diagram (F/385/1 (detail) (1848).

21

3 Calculation

The symbols and graphics are part of the Mechanical Notation, the language of signs and
symbols Babbage devised to describe, specify and optimise the designs (Overview, Mechanical
Notation, pp. 6-9). In what follows the main use of the Notation is to identify parts using the
lettered conventions as they appear in the drawings. Typically, the letters identifying parts
have superscripts and subscripts. In this account the notations are used largely as
uninterpreted labels to identify and refer to parts in the drawings. Sometimes, where of
particular interest or where they have significance in the interpretation of the drawings, the
notations are explained. The Mechanical Notation as a symbolic descriptive language is the
subject of a separate study. Only a brief outline is given here.
In relation to the Timing Diagram (Fig. 3.2), the length of an arrow indicates duration of motion,
except in the case of short vertical arrows with no tail symbols. The short arrows indicate
lifting and lowering motions with the numbers alongside specifying the amount of physical
displacement in inches. Tail- and head-variants of arrows indicate direction and nature of
motion (circular/linear, clockwise/anticlockwise, and whether the motion returns the part to its
rest position). A dotted arrow shaft indicates conditional motion – whether or not motion
occurs throughout the time window of the arrow, only for part, or not at all. Vertical position
on the page invariably indicates time of occurrence. The motion of locks is not represented in a
separate column but is shown as a ‘state’ of a part, with a backwards ‘F’ (ᖷ) indicating ‘Free’
when the locks are disengaged, and an ‘L’ indicating ‘Locked’.
The timing cycle is tight and some of the critical transitions, especially when the locks engage
and disengage, are too fine to be accurately specified with 50-unit resolution i.e. an event
resolution of 7.2 was not fine enough to specify certain time-critical motions. Babbage’s
original Timing Diagram (which has omissions and inconsistencies) was refined to provide
greater detail for the purposes of specification, mechanical design, and manufacture. It was
also expanded to include the phasing of the locks as separate moveable parts as the timing of
the operation of the locks has nearly no margin.
The fully detailed Timing Diagram (337 X 21) is the definitive reference source for the built
Engine and frequent reference is made to it throughout this account (see p. 221).
Main Drawings:

A/171, F/385/1, 337 X 21

Related Drawings:

A/161, A/164, A/176, A/177

3.1 Giving-off
Tabulation using finite differences requires the repeated addition of multi-digit numbers.
Drawing A/171 (Fig. 3.3) shows the mechanism for the non-destructive addition of a

22

3 Calculation

multidigit number on one column of figure wheels to a multidigit number on the figure
wheel column to its immediate left.

Fig. 3.3: Difference Engine No. 2, Addition and Carriage (A/171) (detail).

Drawing A/171 (Fig. 3.3) shows, in the view bottom left, two adjacent figure wheel
columns (n1Δ2, n1Δ1) (expanded in Fig. 3.4). The cluster of parts at about 12-o’clock
above the left-hand figure wheel (including the ‘fairground’ helix) is the mechanism for
the carriage of tens. The wheel with the cut out (nS2) is a sector wheel in a column of
sector wheels which interposes, wheel for wheel, between the two figure wheel
columns.
The figure wheel on the right (2Δ2) belongs to an even difference column, the one on the
left (2Δ1) to an odd difference column. The notations indicate that the figure wheels are
those of the first difference (left) and second difference (right).
The view across the top is an elevation showing addition and carry mechanisms for a
sample of four stacked figure wheels in each of the two difference columns. The
mechanism has been opened out so as to expand the horizontal spacing for illustration.
The 1st difference figure wheels are drawn in section to show the drive arms and internal
nibs. The mechanism for the 2nd difference column (top right) is identical but the
sectional detail of the figure wheels has not been repeated.

23

3 Calculation

Carry arms
Carry levers

Carry axis

Warning axis
Figure wheel
zero stop

Warning latch

Figure wheel
supports
Figure
Wheel

Reset stops

Figure
wheel
axis

Nibs
Warning claw

Figure
wheel
lock
Figure
wheel

Drive
arm
Figure
wheel
axis

Sector
wheel

Lug
Sector
zero
stop

Restoring
arm
Sector
axis

Fig. 3.4: Difference Engine No. 2, Addition and Carriage (A/171) (detail).

In the account that follows the vertical stacks of figure wheels and sectors are usually
referred to as ‘columns’ when the context is their physical arrangement, and referred to
as ‘axes’ when the context is the circular motions driven by the central drive shafts.
‘Axis’ often refers to both the figure wheels and the drive shaft. The two terms are
interchangeable. The Intended meanings are almost always evident from the context.

Figure Wheels
The basic addition mechanism is shown in the sectional plan view (Fig. 3.4). The view
features two figure wheels coupled by an intermediate sector wheel.
Each figure wheel has forty teeth with the pitch of one tooth (9) corresponding to a
24

3 Calculation

single decimal number 0 to 9.

Drive
nibs

Each wheel has four identical runs
of decimal numbers and the same
digit value can be represented by
any one of four interchangeable
angular positions referenced from
an appropriate starting point. So
each of the four quadrants of the
figure wheel represents one
decade 0 to 9 (Fig. 3.5).1

Warning
nibs

Barrel

Fig. 3.5: Figure wheel. One of 248.

The figure wheels rotate freely on the figure wheel shafts i.e. they are not keyed or
otherwise fixed to the shaft but rest on figure wheel supports. These are comb-like
pillars that run the full vertical length of the columns with figure wheels resting on the
equally spaced teeth of the comb (337 C 312). Each column of figure wheels is fitted
with three figure wheel supports positioned roughly at 10-o’clock, 2-o’clock, and 5o’clock, (3O, 2P, 9Q, Figs. 3.4, 3.6, 3.15). The figure wheel supports are part of the
structural frame. The angular intervals between the supports around the figure wheel
axis are not identical.
Figure wheel
supports

Support
teeth

Fig. 3.6: Figure wheel supports (top plates removed).
1

In the build Engine numbers on the odd figure wheels are engraved in reverse order to those on even
figure wheels. This is because of a layout modification (see p. 38 and p. 47).

25

3 Calculation

The figure wheels are driven by drive arms (n2E1, n2E2) keyed to the figure wheel drive
shafts. The drive arms bear against internal nibs positioned at 90 intervals inside the
barrel of each figure wheel i.e. there are four internal drive nibs inside each figure wheel
barrel. The figure wheels themselves remain on the same horizontal plane throughout
i.e. they do not move vertically but only rotate within the cages formed by the combs of
the figure wheel supports.
The drive arms are engaged and disengaged by lifting and lowering the figure wheel axis
at appropriate points in the cycle. Lowering the axis drops the drive arms into the plane
of the internal nibs; lifting the axis disengages the drive arms by raising them clear of the
nibs. The drive arms are disengaged when the wheels are being added to, and when
manually setting the initial values at the start of a run of calculations.
Figure Wheel Zero Stops
As well as four internal nibs, each figure wheel has four external nibs integral with the
barrel (Fig. 3.4, 3.5). The external nibs:
1. stop the figure wheels in the zero position and prevent over-running – this by
running up against the zero stops (S1, S2 Fig. 3.4).
2. arm the carry warning mechanism by nudging the curved warning claw of the
carry lever if the figure wheel passes through 9 (Fig. 3.4 left).
During each calculating cycle figure wheels are driven to zero by the internal drive arms
bearing against the nibs on the inside of the figure wheel barrels. The zero stops halt the
rotation to correctly position figure wheels when reduced
to zero i.e. they prevent over-rotation past zero. The zero
stops are not permanently fixed in the plane of the figure

Lock

Figure
Zero
wheel
stop
bar Collar axis

wheels. At appropriate points in the cycle they are raised
to clear the external nibs so as not to obstruct the receiving
wheel if its number value passes through 9 during givingoff.
The zero stops are lifted and lowered by the figure wheel
axes to which they are coupled in a piggy-back arrangement
(A/160 left view, right) (Fig. 3.7). A yolk (7K1) at the base of
the zero stop pillar (S1 ) engages with a collar (2B1) on the
lower part of the figure wheel axis. The yolk and collar
arrangement allow the figure wheel axis to transmit vertical
motions to the zero stops but not circular motions.

26

Yolk
Fig. 3.7: Zero stop drive.

3 Calculation

The vertical motion of the zero stop pillars is guided at
the top end by bronze slider blocks on the top plates that
span the topmost framing pieces. The tops of two zero
stop bars are shown back to back in Fig. 3.8. This is a
modification of Babbage’s original layout. The revised
layout is shown in 337 X 26 and discussed in 3.6
Resolution of the Layout Design Error, p. 47.
Fig. 3.8: Zero stop sliders.

Sector Wheels

Zero stop
bars

The sector wheels, often called simply sectors:
1. couple and uncouple figure wheels in adjacent columns
2. restore the number given off so that this difference value is not lost and is
available to be added to in the next calculating cycle.
The sector wheels (nS2 Fig. 3.4) are free to rotate on the sector axes i.e. they are not
keyed to the shafts. They are driven by restoring arms (n1T2) keyed to the shafts, which
bear on a drive lug that protrudes above each sector (Figs. 3.9 centre, 3.10). The
restoring arm drives the sector in the direction of the sector zero stop (2M2), reducing it
to zero, and in doing so returns the sector to its rest position.

Figure wheel
axis

Sector axis
Single
depth
teeth

Figure wheel
Restoring
axis
arm
Drive
lug Double
depth
teeth

Sector
wheels

Figure
wheels

Fig. 3.9: Sector and figure wheels, Elevation (A/171) (detail).

27

3 Calculation

Unlike the figure wheel
drive-arms, which
disengage from the
internal nibs by being
lifted clear, the sector

Single
depth
teeth

drive arms are
permanently fixed in the
same plane as the drive
lug. The restoring arms

Restoring
arms

Locking
slot
Drive
lug

Double
depth
teeth

Sector
wheels

and sector wheels are
lifted and lowered
together with the sector

Fig. 3.10: Sector axis during assembly.

axis in the same
movement.
A sector wheel can mesh with one, both or neither of the two figure wheels on either
side of it. When fully raised, the sectors are lifted clear of the figure wheels and
disengage from both columns i.e. uncoupling the figure wheel columns from each other.
This is the position shown in the opened-out view, Fig. 3.9.

Drive lug

Single depth teeth

Drive lug

Double depth teeth
Fig. 3.11: Sector wheels: two views of same wheel.

When half-lowered the sectors engage with the right-hand column only and are
disengaged from the left column. This partial engagement occurs because the run of
sector teeth that mesh with the right-hand figure wheel is double depth (Figs. 3.11, 3.12).
In the partially engaged position the sector can drive the right-hand figure wheel without
affecting the left figure wheel. Finally, when fully lowered the sectors mesh with both
left and right-hand figure wheels. In this fully engaged position rotation of the right-hand
figure wheel is transferred to the left-hand figure wheel, wheel for wheel and tooth for
tooth, via the intermediate sectors as required during giving-off.

28

3 Calculation

The rotation of the sectors is limited by zero stops (2M2) which perform two separate
functions:
1. stopping over-rotation of the sector by directly obstructing the path of the cutaway section of the wheel
2. locking the sector when fully disengaged i.e. in the fully raised position when the
sector is restored to the rest position a lug on the zero stop engages with a slot in
the sector wheel.
This locking action prevents derangement during the part of the cycle in which the
sectors are not meshed with either figure wheel. The sector zero stops are not shown in
the opened-out elevation in A/171 (Fig. 3.9).
Locks and Security Devices
Locking devices ensure the digital integrity of operation in which only discrete integers

are legitimate representations of number values. The figure wheel locks are an
example of the most the widely used form of locking mechanism (L1, L2 at about 9o’clock, Fig. 3.4).
Figure wheel locks are long sword-like slats that run the full
length of the figure wheel axis and act on all thirty-one figure

Lock

Figure
wheel
axis

wheels at the same
time. The wedgeshaped edge is
inserted between the

Slider
block

figure wheel teeth at
various points in the

Lock

cycle. 2
The figure wheel locks
are vertical at all
times i.e. when they

Fig. 3.12: Figure wheel lock and
top slide block.

Fig. 3.13: Figure wheels
lock and bottom plate.

Top Slider Block
insert to engage the figure wheel teeth, the lock remains parallel to the figure wheel axis
and moves uniformly in and out along its full length.

2

Wedge locks are also used to align and lock the horizontal racks that interface the results column to
the printer, the printing wheels, and drive pinions for vertical axes (see Chapter 4, Output Apparatus.
Slotted locks are used to immobilise sectors in their rest position. Horn locks on the carry levers are
used in the mechanism for the carriage of tens (see 3.2 Warning and Carriage of Tens, p. 33).

29

3 Calculation

The parallel lateral motion is produced by the lock being raised and lowered. The upper
and lower ends of the locks are angled (Figs. 3.12, 3.13) and pass through angled slots in
the framing, top and bottom. Raising the lock withdraws the wedge from between the
teeth of the figure wheel and disengages the lock; lowering the lock drives the wedge
towards the teeth. The locks are engaged and disengaged by the vertical motion drive at
appropriate times in the timing cycle (337 X 21).
The operation of the
locks is more visible in
the Trial Piece3 where

Figure wheel
lock

supports

they are not obscured
by mechanisms
alongside. The angled
ends of the locks can be

Figure
wheel
support

Figure
wheels
supports

seen passing through
the top and bottom
plates. The locks on the
Trial Piece are lifted and
lowered by hand: lifting

Fig. 3.14: Trial Piece.

disengages the locks,
lowering engages them.
The figure wheel locks perform three essential functions:
1. error prevention
2. error correction
3. error detection
With the lock engaged, the figure wheels are immobilised during intervals in the
calculating cycle in which they might otherwise be vulnerable to movement not
determined by deliberate mechanical control. The locking action is an error-prevention
measure.
As the lock enters between gear teeth, the angled faces of the wedge true up the wheel
and correct small derangements from exact integral values. This acts as a form error
correction (analogous to ‘pulse shaping’ of the kind performed by a Schmidt trigger
circuit in cleaning up the edges of a ragged electronic pulse). The centering action of the
3

The Trial Piece was made before the construction of the full machine to verify and demonstrate
the operation of the basic adding mechanism.

30

3 Calculation

locks aligns the wheel to ensure that the position of a figure wheel coincides precisely
with an integral tooth interval.
Finally, if a toothed wheel deranges by more than 2¼° (half the gap between adjacent
teeth) insertion will be obstructed by the edge of a gear tooth. The lock will foul and the
machine will jam. The crank handle seizes, and the operator is alerted that something is
amiss. Jamming is not the misfortune it would ordinarily be but a form of error
detection: a jam signals that the integrity of the calculation is compromised and that a
wheel is in an intermediate position. The jam halts the calculation, signalling that a fault
needs to be cleared.
Figure wheel locks are activated four times during each machine cycle to immobile figure
wheels to lock their number values, correct small derangements, or polling for
indeterminate positions (337 X 21 Timing Diagram).
The section of the figure wheel locks that extend below the stack of figure wheels also
lock the circular motion quadrants (Fig. 3.7, A/171 lower right) that provide the rotational
drive to the figure wheel axes (A/160 left, centre).
Initial Conditions
The basic addition unit is shown in Fig. 3.3 with the relevant part for giving-off repeated
here (Fig. 3.15).
The Timing Diagram (Fig. 3.2) shows that the first addition is from odd to even
differences and occurs in the first half-cycle, and from even to odd differences in the

Drive
arm

Figure
wheel
zero
stop

Nib
s
Restoring
arm
Figure
wheel
axis
Figure
wheel

Figure
wheel
lock
Figure
wheel

Figure
wheel
axis

Sector
wheel
Sector
axis

Sector
zero
stops

31

Fig. 3.15: Addition mechanism (A/171) (detail).

Drive
lug
Locking
slot

Figure
wheel
supports

3 Calculation

second half-cycle. However, the main drawing of the mechanism (Fig. 3.3, A/171) shows
a layout for the addition of evens to odds. So that the description relates directly to the
drawing, the account below starts with the second half-cycle i.e. half way through the
Timing Diagrams – unit 25 in F/385/1 and 180 in 337 X 21.
The view shown in the main plan (Fig. 3.15) shows the position of parts at the start of the
second half-cycle (180 in 337 X 21) during which the even difference on the right-hand
figure wheel is added to an odd difference on the left-hand wheel. Both figure wheel
drive arms are raised i.e. clear of the internal nibs. From the position of the zero stops in
relation to the angular position of the external nibs, both figure wheels are shown set to
zero. This is a special case and does not generally apply i.e. in general figure wheels will
register a non-zero number at the start of the cycle and will be offset counter-clockwise
from the zero position, by a variable number of teeth (9 per tooth) corresponding to the
digit value for that number position. The internal nibs shown at 5-o’clock will therefore
in general be somewhere in the quadrant between 5-o’clock and 2-o’clock i.e. in the
most general case each of the thirty-one wheels in a column will be displaced
anticlockwise from the position shown, by a variable displacement corresponding the
digit value. In the special case shown, in the next addition half-cycle, zero (to thirty-one
places) on the right-hand column will be added to zero (to thirty-one places) on the lefthand column.
At the start the evens-to-odds half-cycle (180 in the calculating cycle) the figure wheel
locks are fully engaged and both columns are immobilised. The sectors are at zero i.e.
fully clockwise against the zero stops and are fully raised (by the sector axis) and the
restoring arms fully anticlockwise. With the sectors in the home position (i.e. against the
zero stops) raising them locks them by engaging the locking lug on the zero stop with a
slot in the sectors. In the fully raised position the sectors are disengaged from both sets
of figure wheels so that the figure wheels are uncoupled from each other. The restoring
arms are fully anticlockwise (at 1-o’clock). The sectors are against the zero stops at the
start of cycle regardless of the numbers set on the right and left figure wheels at the start
of cycle.
Operation
Giving-off starts with the sectors lowering into full engagement with the two figure
wheel columns. Lowering the sectors unlocks them by disengaging the locking lug on the
zero stop from the slot in the sector. In the same interval the right-hand figure wheel
axis and zero stops are lowered so that the drive arms are in the plane of the internal
nibs and the zero stops are in the plane of the external nibs. The left-hand figure wheel

32

3 Calculation

axis remains in the raised position with the drive arms and zero stops disengaged. This
allows the external nib of the left-hand figure wheel to pass the zero-stop position
without obstruction as is required if the figure wheel value exceeds 9 during giving-off.
The locks on both figure wheel columns lift to disengage and the right-hand figure wheel
axis rotates clockwise from its rest position though its full travel of 81 i.e. 9 (one tooth
pitch) short of a full quadrant. During this sweep the right-hand wheel is reduced to zero
and the zero stop prevents overshoot by blocking the path of the outer nib. The number
held on the figure wheel at the start of the cycle (in the case shown in A/171 this is zero)
is transferred tooth for tooth to the sector wheel which in turn drives the left-hand figure
wheel. The number on the left-hand figure wheel is increased by the number from the
right-hand wheel completing the basic operation of addition. The right-hand figure wheel
is now at zero and the original evens difference number is stored by the rotational
displacement of the sector.
If during giving-off a left-hand figure wheel exceeds 9 then a carriage of tens is required
to complete the addition. Tens carriage is not carried out during giving-off i.e. the action
to increment the figure wheel above does not occur when the figure wheel passes from 9
to 0. Instead, during giving-off, a warning device is armed and latched to flag that a carry
is still outstanding. The warnings are then serviced in the next phase of the cycle during
which the tens are carried. Warning and carriage occur during separate parts of the
cycle.

3.2 Warning and Carriage of Tens
The warning and carriage mechanism is shown in plan as a cluster assembly above the
left-hand figure wheel in Figs. 3.3, 3.4) a detail of which is repeated below (Fig. 3.16).
The mechanism consists of the warning axis (3W 1, shown at 12-o'clock to the figure
wheel axis), the three-limbed carry levers (nW 1) mounted on the warning axis, the
spring-loaded warning mechanisms with detent levers (n1K) mounted on the detent

support arms (n3Gi1) , the reset stops (2K1) which are fixed to the figure wheel support
pillar shown at 2-o'clock to the figure wheel axis, and carry axis (1C1) with the helical
arrangement of carry arms (1C1n).
The carry lever is the most complex single part in the Engine. Each has three limbs which
project radially from a central boss with which it is forms a single piece. The inset (Fig.
3.16) shows a loose carry lever inverted to show the warning claw detail. (In normal
operation it is the other way up i.e. claw is on the underside).

33

3 Calculation

Carry axis
Carry lever (inverted)

Detent
lever

Carry
arms

Detent
arm
Warning
axis

Warning
latch

Carry
levers
Horn

Figure
wheel
lock

Reset stops

Drive
Arm

Warning
claw

Figure
wheel
zero stops

Warning
nib

Figure
wheel
Fig. 3.16: Warning and Carriage Mechanism (A/171) (detail).

A carry lever performs three functions:
1.

warns that there is a carry pending

2.

locks the figure wheels to prevent derangement during the carry period

3.

advances the next figure wheel above by one if the carry warning is set.

The carry levers do not pivot on the warning axis directly but are free to rotate on the
steel boss attached to the detent support arm which is in turn keyed to the carry axis. In
the mock-up in Fig. 3.17 the position of the figure wheel in relation to the carry lever is
not exact – it is too far away from the figure wheel. The correct position is shown in Fig.
3.16 i.e. the cutaway horn (left) immediately above the claw is close enough to engage
with the teeth of the figure wheel, and the right-hand horn should be poised to enter the
gap between two figure wheel teeth immediately below.

34

3 Calculation

Detent
limb

Detent
lever

Carry
lever

Spring
case

Detent
support
arm

Warning
claw
Cutaway
horn

Horn
Figure
wheel

Fig. 3.17: Warning lever, latch and warning limb (placement of figure wheel is indicative).

The limb shown at 10 o’clock is the detent limb which has four positional notches in it.
The steel detent lever, biased by a spring, captive in a spring housing fixed to the detent
support arm, acts to latch the carry lever in one of four discrete positions determined by
four V-notches (working points v1, v2, v3, v4 Fig. 3.16). The four angular positions of the
lever correspond respectively to the four states, ‘unwarned’, ‘warned’, ‘carried’, and
‘disconnected’ (Fig. 3.16). The carry lever shown at 2-o’clock is drawn solid in the
unwarned position (first V-notch) and as dotted partial views in the other three positions.
(In the Notation v1 to v4 are ‘working points’ rather than parts identifiers. For ease of
reference they are used here to identify the four V-notches.)
The lever shown just past 6-o’clock has two limbs: the curved warning claw, and two
horns resembling an escapement. The claw and the horns are in different horizontal
planes and span two figure wheel digit positions (inset Figs. 3.16, 3.19) i.e. the horns act
on the figure wheel one above the one that operates the warning claw.
The horns have two functions: they prevent figure wheels from deranging while waiting
for a possible carry from below and ensure that a figure wheel cannot be incremented
unless driven from a legitimate source at the appropriate part of the calculating cycle (by a
carry from below or as a result of giving-off from a higher order difference column
alongside); the second function of the horns is to increment by one a figure wheel for the

35

3 Calculation

carriage of tens. These actions are described below.
Carry Arms
The helical ‘fairground’ arrangement in Fig. 3.16 consists of the carry
axis (1C1) and carry arms (1C 1n ). There are thirty carry arms with a
fixed angular pitch of 22½ around the carry axis which creates the
helical form, with a single 45 gap between the 15th and 16th carry arms
as the only exception. The arms have the same fixed vertical pitch as
the figure wheels so that each figure wheel has an associated carry
lever in the same plane. The 45 gap between the 15th and 16th carry
arms avoids fouling in two separate situations as explained below.
In the plan view each of the fifteen arms hides its counterpart in the
run below i.e. C30 conceals C15, C29 conceals C14 etc. The uppermost
carry arm (at 4-o’clock) is annotated ‘C15 C30’ indicating that the single
arm drawn represents the arm visible from above as well as the hidden
arm below. Only the uppermost arm is so annotated (a drafting
economy): a fully annotated drawing would have two notations for
each arm.

Fig. 3.18:
Carry axis.

Warning
As a figure wheel passes from 9 to 0 the external nib on the barrel of the figure wheel, in
the same horizontal plane as the warning claw, pushes the claw outwards i.e. away from
the figure wheel (Fig. 3.16). The passage of the nib past the claw nudges the carry lever
clockwise from the unwarned position (first V-notch), to the warned position (second Vnotch) where it is held by the sprung detent lever. The carry lever is latched by the
detent lever in the warned position and, in so doing, storing the need for a carry until the
next phase of the cycle. If the latch is set, the warning device is said to be armed. An
armed latch signals that a carry to the next higher decade is required to complete the
addition. The act of arming the warning latch, and the subsequent execution of the
carriage, are separate actions i.e. the next wheel up is not incremented at the same time
as the lower wheel exceeds 9.
Warning action occurs during giving-off and occurs only when a figure wheel value
exceeds 9. Giving-off and warning occur within the same time window for all thirty-one
digit-positions in the column. Warning occurs in general at different times for each figure
wheel depending on the number value of a particular figure wheel in the course of a

36

3 Calculation

calculation.
During giving-off the warning axis carry levers are their raised positions (Fig. 3.19). The
escapement horns of the carry levers are clear of the figure wheel teeth but the warning
claw remains in the same plane as the external nib (Fig. 3.19). The rotation of the carry
lever, nudged by the external nib, rotates the escapement horns so that the right-hand
horn is poised above but clear of the gap between two figure wheel teeth below (Fig.
3.16).

Figure
wheel
Axis

Warning
axis

Escapement
horns
Warning
claw

Figure
wheel

Fig. 3.19: Warning mechanism, Elevation (A/171) (detail).

37

3 Calculation

Design Error
In the description so far the right-hand figure wheel rotates clockwise when giving-off,
the sector is driven anticlockwise and the left-hand figure wheel clockwise during
addition (Fig. 3.15). At the start of the addition cycle the sector is in its home position
against the zero stop with the restoring arm displaced anti-clockwise. The rotation of the
sector during giving-off must therefore be counter-clockwise from the zero stop as this is
the only degree of rotational freedom possible. It follows then that the right-hand figure
wheels rotate clockwise when giving-off and, since it is meshed to the left-hand figure
wheel via the sectors, the left-hand figure wheel therefore also rotates clockwise when
being added to. The warning mechanisms should therefore be armed by clockwise
rotation of the outer nibs of the figure wheels during addition. However, with the
warning mechanism as shown in Fig. 3.15 the warning claw will be correctly actioned by
anticlockwise rotation of the figure wheel. If the figure wheel were to rotate clockwise
with the arrangement as drawn, the curved warning limb would foul the outer nib of the
figure wheel and act as a stop. Clockwise rotation of the figure wheel during addition is
therefore inconsistent with correct warning and the mechanism will not work if made as
drawn.
The directional arrows on the figure wheel and sector axes in Fig. 3.15 (all of which are
drawn with a clockwise sense) are little help. In the evolution of the Notation, arrow
directions had different meanings at different times. At one point they indicated
direction of physical rotation. Later this was changed to indicate ‘positive direction’ i.e. so
as to increase number value. The idea of ‘positive direction’ was complicated by the
sense of the numbering on the figure wheels i.e. direction of physical rotation to increase
or decrease a number value depended on whether the numbers engraved on the figure
wheels increased clockwise or counter-clockwise. The directional arrows in Fig. 3.15 are
inconsistent however interpreted. The notations in the original Timing Diagram (Fig. 3.2)
have their own omissions and inconsistencies. These too have so far defied coherent
interpretation.
The principle of the mechanism is sound and it is possible that the inconsistency is no
more than a drafting error. For the purposes of this description, we will continue to use
the original layout – this so as to maintain Babbage’s drawings as the primary
interpretative source – but with the assumption that the left-hand figure wheel rotates
anti-clockwise during giving-off. The problem and its solution are discussed more fully
below (3.6 Resolution of the Layout Design Error, p. 47). In the meantime, a brief
suspension of disbelief is required.

38

3 Calculation

At the end of the warning phase the locks on both figure wheel axes engage. The left
figure wheel lock engages and quickly disengages to correct minor derangements and to
ensure that a figure wheel is not in an indeterminate position between two integers
(Timing Diagrams 337 X 21, F/385/1, Fig. 3.2). The right-hand figure wheel lock engages
and immobilises the figure wheels until they are again freed to move to have their initial
values restored. At the same time as the locks engage, the sectors are raised to their
partially engaged positions i.e. they remain meshed with the right-hand figure wheels,
and disengaged from the left-hand figure wheels so as to free the left-hand figure wheels
for the carriage of tens (Fig. 3.19).
The carry levers are not locked and can be wilfully or inadvertently deranged to provide
false warnings and false indication of carriage i.e. the levers can be moved by hand from
unwarned to warned whenever the figure wheels are stationary, and from warned to
carried at certain times in the cycle. Inadvertent derangement is discouraged by the
sprung detent lever pressing into the V-notches but derangement is still physically
possible.
Carriage
During the carry phase the warning mechanisms are serviced in turn and the carries
propagate upwards i.e. the next figure wheel up is conditionally incremented by one
tooth if the associated warning mechanism is armed. If the warning mechanism is not
armed, no action to carry is taken.
The carry phase starts with the withdrawal of the locks from the left-hand figure wheels
to free the wheels to receive a carry (337 X 21). At the same time the warning axis is
lowered. This brings the escapement horns into the same plane as the upper figure
wheel teeth. For unwarned figure wheels the cutaway horns on the left (Figs. 3.16) drop
over and engage with the upper figure wheel. This locks the upper wheel to prevent
derangement during the carry cycle when the figure wheel is otherwise unsecured. The
right-hand horn is clear of the outer edges of the figure wheel teeth as shown in Fig.
3.16. In the case of warned figure wheels the rotational advance of the carry lever from
‘unwarned’ to ‘warned’ partially inserts the right-hand lug into the gap between two
adjacent teeth ready to nudge the upper wheel one unit anticlockwise during the next
phase of the cycle. The insertion of the lug has the additional function of acting as a
partial lock.

39

3 Calculation

With the carry levers in their lowered position the warning claw is still in the path of the
external nib and unwarned carry levers can still be acted on by figure wheels that did not
trigger warnings during giving-off. This allows for secondary carries i.e. carries that result
from carries (see below).
Lowering the warning axis brings the carry levers into the same horizontal plane as the
carry arms so that the lozenges of the warned limbs are now in the path of the lozenges
of the corresponding carry arms (Fig. 3.16).
The rotation of the carry axis follows, and with it the rotation of the helical array of carry
arms. With the angular stagger of the carry arms each figure wheel in a given stack is
polled in turn starting from below as the carry axis rotates (in a technique Babbage called
‘successive carry’). The direction of rotation is anticlockwise as indicated by the
directional arrow drawn in the circle representing the carry shaft (1C1 Fig. 3.16). If a
carry lever is unwarned then the trajectory of the carry arm lozenge does not intersect
with the lozenge on the carry lever: the lozenges then pass without contact and no action
to carry is taken. If the position is warned, the locus of the two lozenges intersect i.e. the
act of warning during giving-off places the carry lever in the path of the carry arm. The
outer face of the carry arm lozenge wipes past the inner face of the carry lever lozenge
and pushes the carry lever aside as it slides past. This action of the carry arm nudges the
carry lever one position on, from ‘warned’ to ‘carried’ (from v2 to v3) i.e. to the next
discrete position on the run of V-notches. The clockwise rotation of the carry lever
advances the right-hand horn of the escapement and this nudges the figure upper figure
wheel one tooth on i.e. increments the number value by 1. The helical arrangement of
carry arms services each warning mechanism in turn and increments the figure wheel
depending on whether or not the mechanism is warned.
With the carry lever in the disconnected position the right-hand lug interposes between
two adjacent figure wheel teeth when lowered and acts as a figure wheel lock during the
carry phase.
Both sets of carry axes (i.e. odd and even axes) rotate together. During the even carry
the odd carry arms rotate freely without encountering any warning limbs and vice versa.
This is because during the carry phase of one set of axes, the warning axes of the other
set are raised and the swirling carry arms are in different planes to the carry levers so do
not interact. The inactive carry axis is captioned ‘idling’ in the revised Timing Diagram
(337 X 21).

40

3 Calculation

Secondary Carries
A primary carry is one that occurs as a result of a warning being set during giving-off. A
secondary carry occurs when a figure wheel exceeds 9 as a result of a primary carry.
The most extreme case of a so-called ‘domino carry’ occurs when any non-zero number
in the least significant digit position is given-off to a column with all figure wheels at 9.
The lower-most (units) wheel is incremented 9 to 0 during giving-off which sets a warning
for a primary carry. During the carry cycle the first carry arm services the warning and
increments the next figure wheel which itself transitions from 9 to 0 setting the warning
for the next figure wheel above. The newly armed warning mechanism is immediately
polled by the next carry arm in the sequence and the secondary carry is propagated as
before, and ripple carries can be propagated up the stack in this way. This successive
carry operation will correctly propagate the carry up the stack leaving each figure wheel
set to zero and an overflow carry at the top of the stack.
In the helical arrangement of carry arms the vertical separation of the carry arms
corresponds to the pitch of the figure wheels and the angular pitch is fixed at 22½.
There is one exception to this i.e. the spacing between the 15th and 16th arms is 45 not
22½ (gap shown at 5- o’clock in Fig. 3.16). The function of the gap is to prevent the
carry arm and carry lever from fouling in either of two conditions. During giving-off the
warning axis (3W 1, Fig. 3.16) is raised as shown in the elevation in Fig. 3.19. In this
position the carry levers are not in the same plane as the carry arms and there is
therefore no danger of the carry lever fouling a carry arm if a carry lever advances from
the unwarned to warned positions. However, during the carry cycle the warning axis is
lowered. If the carry arms were on a fixed 22½ pitch then the 16th carry lever would foul
the corresponding carry arm when the axis lowered. The double gap between the 15th
and 16th arms allows the carry levers to lower without conflict.
The carry levers are only in the same plane as the carry arms only during the interval in
which the carries occur (81°-168°, 261°-348°, 337 X21). Since, in normal operation, no
primary warnings can occur in the carriage interval, there is no risk of rotational fouling
i.e. the lozenge of the carry lever fouling the lozenge of a carry arm by attempting a
warning were the double gap not there. However, if for whatever reason (a fracture in
the drive train lifting the warning axes for example) the carry arms and carry levers were
in the same plane and a warning was attempted the arms would foul. Again, the double
gap removes this risk.

41

3 Calculation

The carry axes complete two rotations for each carry action: the first rotation services
carry warnings latched during giving-off in both upper and lower sections of the figure
wheel axis; the second pass services a warning set during the first pass by the fifteenth
figure wheel as this would not be cleared in the first pass. The double rotation ensures
that this secondary carry, and any that result from it, are propagated i.e. that carries that
result from carries are actioned.
The carry mechanism for individual figure wheels can be disabled by manually rotating
the carry lever into the fourth detent position (‘Disconnected’ in Fig. 3.16) during the
setting up procedure. Disabling the carry mechanism in this way prevents carries from
propagating past the disabled figure wheel. This has the effect splitting the 31 digits into
two and isolating the upper and lower sections of the figure wheel columns from each
other. Separate and independent calculations can be run in the two sections and used for
different purposes, as a cycle counter, for example, or to represent an automatically
incremented argument in the tabulation for transfer to the output apparatus, or for a
separate polynomial calculation carried out at the same time (see below). In the
disconnected position the escapement horns of the carry-levers lock any unused figure
wheels.
Moving the carry levers to the disconnected position is ordinarily blocked by the reset
stops which are in the same horizontal plane. Disabling the carry levers requires raising
the reset stops to allow the levers to pass under the stops. The stops are then lowered
to trap the lever. The stops are freed for raising and lowering by releasing (by hand)
fixing screws in slotted holes in the reset stop support pillar. The procedures are
described in User Manual (2013), 4.4 Automatic Cycle Counting (Step 5, p. 32).

3.3 Restoring the Value Given Off
Giving-off reduces the right-hand figure wheels (Fig. 3.16) to zero and the wheels no
longer hold their initial values. The ‘lost’ difference value needs to be restored to the
difference column for use in the next addition of differences.
During giving-off the sectors are displaced from zero by the initial value of the right-hand
figure wheel (if non-zero). This value, stored on the sectors, is restored to the figure
wheel during last phase of the second half-cycle.
At the start of the restoring phase the right-hand figure wheels are at zero and the
sectors are displaced from zero by the initial value on the right-hand figure wheel (Timing

42

3 Calculation

Diagrams F/385/1, 337 X 21). The sectors are fully lowered and are engaged with both
left and right figure wheels (Fig. 3.9). Immediately after giving-off the sectors are raised
to the partially engaged (middle) position i.e. meshed with the right-hand figure wheel
but clear of the left wheel, and the right-hand figure wheels are locked and remain so
until the start of the restore operation.
The locks disengage from the right-hand figure wheels and the sector restoring arms
rotate in a clockwise sweep (Fig. 3.4) reducing the sectors to zero by bearing on the drive
lugs. The sector zero stops prevent overshoot by obstructing the cutaway section of the
sector. Since the sectors are coupled to the right-hand figure wheels, reduction to zero
of the sectors transfers, tooth for tooth, to the figure wheel, the ‘lost’ initial value of the
figure wheel. During restoration the sectors are uncoupled from the left-hand figure
wheels and these remain unaffected by the rotation of the sectors. In reducing to zero
the sectors restore the figure wheels values to those held before giving-off.
During restoration the right-hand figure wheel axis rotates anticlockwise and returns the
drive arms to the position at the start of cycle. This does not affect restoration as the
figure wheel axis is in the raised position i.e. the drive arms are lifted clear of the internal
nibs.
Restoration of the initial value of the right-hand figure wheel partially overlaps with the
carry cycle of the left-hand figure wheels with both the carry and restoration phases
ending at the same time i.e. at the end of the second half-cycle. Both left and right-hand
figure wheel locks then engage, and the sector axis is raised into full disengagement from
both left and right figure wheels (337 X 21).
The end of the second half-cycle leaves the right-hand figure wheels with their start-ofcycle values restored, the left-hand figure wheels with the sum of the left- and right-hand
initial values, and the sectors against their zero stops, fully disengaged and locked, ready
for the next half-cycle.

3.4 Resetting Warning Latches
There are two last actions needed to restore the mechanism to the start-of-cycle
condition in preparation for the half-cycle that follows: returning the sector restoring
arms to their anticlockwise home position; and resetting the armed warning mechanisms
to their unwarned positions. Both these actions occur in the half-cycle that follows.

43

3 Calculation

In the configuration shown in Fig. 3.4
(evens to odds), resetting the odds

Reset
stops

warning mechanisms to the unwarned

Detent
limb

Carry
lever

positions occurs at the end of the first
half-cycle. The warning axis has already
been raised so the escapement horns
are above the plane of the figure wheel
teeth. The warning axis rotates
clockwise and with it the detent support
arms, which are keyed to the axis (Fig.

Warning
claw

3.16). The spring-loaded detent lever,

Warning
axis
Fig. 3.20: Reset stops, Elevation (A/171) (detail).

mounted on the detent support arm, is
carried clockwise, and the carry levers

are driven towards the reset stops by the detent limb. The carry levers are in the same
plane as the reset stops (Fig. 3.19) and the carry levers in the carried position will be
driven against the stops and their motion halted. The detent support arm continues
clockwise, and the detent lever is driven in turn from the carried V-notch (v3) to the
warned notch (v2) and finally to the unwarned notch (v1) as it rides along the notched
outer curve of the detent limb. The unwarned carry levers are unaffected: they are
already reset and do not bear on the reset stops.

Carry
levers
Reset
stops

Fig. 3.21: Reset stops and carry levers.

44

3 Calculation

The clockwise rotation of the detent support arm is followed immediately by a counter
clockwise return motion which returns the whole assembly, with all levers unwarned, to
their home positions (Fig. 3.16). The carry levers in the ‘Disconnected’ state are
unaffected by the warning reset: disconnected levers are trapped behind the reset stops
and, during the movement of the detent support arm, simply wave back and forth
between the two disconnected positions (Fig. 3.16). The clockwise/anticlockwise waving
motion of the warning axes to drive the carry levers against the reset stops, resets the
carry levers to the unwarned position. This is the only function of the circular motion of
this axis and Babbage refers to the axis as the ‘Unwarning Axis’ in the Timing Diagram
(Fig. 3.2).
In the operations described above the carry lever plays a critical multifunctional role.
Motion is imparted to the carry lever in four distinct ways for four separate operations:
warning, carriage, reset and when disabled i.e.
1. by the outer nib of the figure wheel acting on the warning claw as the wheel is
driven past 9 during addition. This advances the lever from ‘unwarned‘ to the
‘warned’.
2. by the sweep of the carry arm during the carry phase. This advances the lever
from ‘warned’ to ‘carried’.
3. by the detent support arm and reset stops when the mechanism is reset after
each addition cycle. The reset function returns the carry lever from ‘carried’ to
‘unwarned’ (first V-notch).
4. by hand to the ‘Disconnected’ position. This disables the transmission of carries.

3.5 ‘Pipelining’
In the pen-and-paper use of the method of differences the higher order difference is
added to the next lower order difference, the lower order difference is then added to the
next lower order difference and this process is repeated serially to generate each next
tabular value. In the Engine the progression from the highest difference column through
to the tabular value does not occur in a stepwise sequence right to left from column to
column in seven distinct repetitions of the same sequence. Instead the calculating cycle
is split into two halves. The four odd difference columns are added to the even
difference columns in the first half-cycle, and all the even difference columns are added
to the odd difference columns in the second half-cycle. (The tabular value column is
classed as an even column). The overlapping concurrent operations are analogous to
‘pipelining’ in modern computing.

45

3 Calculation

Provided this phasing arrangement is taken account of when setting up at the start of a
run, by offsetting the initial values on alternate columns, the end result is the same.
Carries are executed within each half-cycle so that the additions in each half-cycle are
complete. In this arrangement a single calculating cycle consists of two half-cycles with
odds-to-evens addition in the first half-cycle and, in a repetition of the sequences
described above, evens-to-odds in the second half-cycle. Each full cycle, consisting of
two half-cycles produces a new tabular value, and cycling the Engine produces the
tabular series with each new tabular value appearing on the results column after each
odds-to-evens addition.
The phasing of the two half-cycles and the interleaving of the various actions are shown
in the two timing diagrams (F/385/1, 337 X 21).
‘Pipelining’ has several advantages:
1. Time Efficiency: if the addition (with carry) of two multi-digit numbers takes say 1
unit of time then seven serial additions take 7 units. The pipelined arrangement
generates each tabular value in 2 units of time and so in the case of a 7th order
polynomial offers a 7:2 speed advantage.
2. Machine Usage: adding each difference to its neighbour in separate serial
operations involves one column pair at a time i.e. only two of the eight columns
are active for each addition and 75% of the engine is idle. In the pipelined
arrangement all the columns participating in the calculation are active throughout
the tabulation.
3. Scalability: with pipelining the cycle time of the engine is independent of the
number of differences used in the calculation and the Engine could be extended
to a greater number of differences without time penalty.
4. Simplicity: the parallel addition of odds-to-evens and evens-to-odds in the
pipelined arrangement allows for a simpler control mechanism than required for a
serial addition sequence. Adding column pairs serially requires a control system
that independently activated each column pair in turn – a substantially more
complex design than required for the phased pairing of alternate axes at the same
time

46

3 Calculation

3.6 Resolution of the Layout Design Error
The analysis of the warning mechanism as drawn flagged that the clockwise rotation of
the left hand (odds) figure wheel (Fig. 3.3) was inconsistent with correct warning action
and that and that the mechanism will not work if made as drawn. Put differently, during
giving-off, the left-hand figure wheel needs to rotate anti-clockwise to correctly arm the
warning latch, yet from the layout it is clear that the figure wheel rotates clockwise and
the nib on the figure wheel will foul the warning claw and act as a stop.
It is unclear whether this conflict is a design oversight, a drafting error, or a deliberate
error to foil plagiarism or espionage. While the error is a fundamental one it does not
compromise the viability of the design, but the mechanism as drawn will not function as
intended.
Several solutions were considered. The one chosen involves mirror-imaging the layout of
alternate axes i.e. opposite-handing the odd and even axes. This retains the form of all
parts but alternate axes are opposite handed. The revised layout is shown in Fig. 3.22.

Fig. 3.22: Revised layout showing handing of alternate axes

The relationship of the axes for even differences is handed to the right as in the original
layout. The relationship of the axes for odd differences is mirrored and handed to the
left. This involves most parts on the odd difference axes being opposite handed: carry

47

3 Calculation

levers, carry lever support arms, carry arms, direction of numbering on figure wheel
barrels, sectors, reset stops, sector and figure wheel zero stops and so on. The figure
wheel locks are not mirrored – this to maintain the uniform pitch of the bell cranks that
lift and lower the locks. (see 7. Drive, Lifting and Lowering, pp. 175-178).
The layouts shown in related drawings A/161, A/164, A/176 and A/177 indicate that the
two-column mechanism shown in A/171 is a generic unit identically repeated for the
remaining four column pairs i.e. the layout of the axes and the orientation of the carriage
mechanism is the same for odd and even differences throughout the machine. Mirroring
alternate axes sacrifices this uniformity.
Mirroring alternate axes involves small modifications to the position of the various
elements of the mechanism around the axes. The gear wheels in Fig. 3.3 are not drawn
symmetrically around a centre-line between the axes and to preserve symmetry of form
and timing, the mirrored arrangement requires repositioning parts around the axes by
2¼, and carrying this adjustment through the whole specification. The mirrored
arrangement also requires the reversal of the direction of rotation for certain circular
motions. These modifications and adjustments are described in what follows as they
arise.
Unequal spacing between figure wheel columns
There is a less serious layout anomaly that was more easily resolved. The main elevation
of the Engine (A/163, Fig 3.1) shows a disruption in the standard pitch of the figure wheel
columns. Specifically, the space between the fifth and sixth difference columns is shown
larger than that between any other column pair. This exception is specifically repeated in
A/164 though masked in A/161, A/176 and A/177 where the full run of 8 columns is not
shown but indicated by broken lines implying repetition. No significance could be found
for this anomalous gap and this was assumed to be a drafting layout error. This
conclusion is confirmed by a tracing BAB/B/002 of the full plan view A/164. The tracing
shows the corrected spacings between the columns as equal.

48

4 Output Apparatus

4.

Output Apparatus

Integral to the concept of the Difference Engine is the automatic production of printed
mathematical tables by mechanical means. Babbage’s intention was that the ‘unerring certainty
of mechanical agency’1 would eliminate the risk of human error in calculation, manual
transcription of results, conventional typesetting using loose type, and proof reading.

Fig. 4.1: Output Apparatus, Difference Engine No. 2.

1

Lardner, Dionysus. "Babbage's Calculating Engine." Edinburgh Review 59 (1834): 263-327. Reprinted:
"Babbage's Calculating Engine." The Works of Charles Babbage. Ed. Campbell-Kelly, Martin. Vol. 2. London:
William Pickering, 1989. Pp. 118-187, p. 169.

49

4 Output Apparatus

The output apparatus prints tabular results in inked hardcopy on a paper print roll, and impresses
results into soft material held in trays. The impressions were intended to serve as moulds for the
production of printing plates for use in a conventional printing press in a process known as
stereotyping.
Tabular values from the results figure wheel column are automatically transferred to the output
apparatus. There is no buffering or storage of results. Each result is printed and stereotyped
during the calculating cycle that generates it.
The output apparatus consists of two sections, the printing apparatus that produces the inked
hardcopy, and the stereotyping apparatus for the production of the stereotyping moulds (Figs.
2.2. 2.3, 2.5, 4.1). The whole apparatus, that is both sections, is often referred to as the printing
mechanism, or printer. Though the apparatus does produce a printed paper record, the primary
function of the apparatus is stereotyping i.e. impressing results on soft material, wet plaster, for
example, to produce a stereotype mould from which printing plates could be cast for duplication
of results by conventional printing which was the principal method of dissemination (Figs. 2.6,
2.7). The inked printout is one-off and used for checking purposes and as a record of the
contents of the stereotypes.
The stereotyping table (lower section left, Fig. 2.3) is larger front-to-back than the calculating
section and provides the platform for the stereotyping trays that receive the results.
Results are impressed in two trays of different sizes at the same time in two different fonts, small
and large (Fig. 4.3). The stereotyping punch wheels lift and lower to impress results but do not
otherwise move along or down the page. Instead the moving platform automatically repositions
the trays under the print heads to receive each new result. The platform and trays move in the XY plane only i.e. in the horizontal plane; the punch wheels move in the vertical plane.
The format of results impressed in the trays is ‘programmable’. Combinations of layout features
can be selected including the number of columns per page, whether results appear in order down
the page (line-to-line with automatic line-wrap) or column-to-column across the page (with
automatic column wrap), line height, leaving blank lines between groups of lines for ease of
reading, page and column margins. Formatting options are chosen by selecting (by moving a
sliding pawl) two from eight pattern wheels where the pitch of the teeth and their arrangement
on the wheel determine the layout options. One set of four pattern wheels controls line-to-line
behaviour, the other set of four, column-to-column behaviour (Fig. 2.5). Individual layout
features are not independently variable but come in fixed combinations with each pattern wheel
determining one set of combinations. Any of the pattern wheels can be swapped out with
pattern wheels customised for combinations other than those provided as standard.

50

4 Output Apparatus

Formatting options are available only for stereotyped results impressed in the trays. Inked
hardcopy printed on the paper roll is in a fixed and unalterable format with the line height,
character spacing, and font size fixed and with results printed in a single column, one result per
printed line (Fig. 2.6).
The operations of the inking, printing and stereotyping mechanisms are co-ordinated and
controlled by a set of vertical cams located inside the frame for the printing apparatus frame and
driven, via gears, from the main drive shaft on the underside of the Engine (Fig. 2.1). The cam
cluster consists of fourteen cams of which ten are conjugate pairs i.e. two cams that are
geometric inversions of each other – where there is a rise on one, there is a corresponding fall on
the other so that the cam followers provide positive drive in both directions.
A second feature of the control mechanisms is the use of locks that operate in five separate
places in the output apparatus: the function of locking and security devices is to preserve digital
integrity of operation. Various locking methods are featured throughout the Engine the most
widely used of which is the wedge lock. A wedge-shaped bar or slat is inserted between gear
teeth or V-shaped notches at specific points in the cycle. The insertion of the lock immobilises
the component so as to prevent derangement (error prevention), makes minor corrective
adjustments to centre the component in the event of small derangements or slightly inexact
resting positions (error correction) or, in the event that a component is displaced outside the
valid operating range, the entry of the lock can be obstructed and the machine will jam,
indicating that the integrity of operation has been compromised (error detection).
All five of the locks in the output apparatus are wedge locks. These were implemented as
originally drawn. It was found that while the printed results were correct, the alignment of type
was inexact. In this case the force of entry of the locks was increased to improve the centering
action beyond minor correction, to ensure alignment of the type to analogue standards of
exactness comparable to manual typesetting using frames.
The output apparatus is bolted directly to the frame of the calculating section to which it is
coupled as shown on the left in the main elevation drawing (Fig. 2.3). The stereotyping table is
supported by its own cast stand which arches over and straddles the two long rails of the engine
base.
Only the thirty least significant digits of the 31-digit result are transferred from the calculating
section to the output apparatus: the most significant digit, represented by the uppermost figure
wheel on the tabular column, is not transferred or printed. This digit serves a guard digit and as
an overflow warning.

51

4 Output Apparatus

There is no printing overhead in the timing cycle: stereotyping and printing do not lengthen the
timing cycle but take place as parallel actions during the standard calculation cycle.
The general arrangement is shown in Fig. 4.2. The illustration shows the mechanism for
transferring two digits of a thirty-one-digit result from the tabular figure wheel column of the
calculating section to the printing and stereotyping apparatus. The mechanisms are identical for
omitted digits.

Spindles

Compound
racks

Even
sectors

Printing
racks

Printing wheels

Tabular
figure
wheels

Pinions
Locking
teeth
Horizontal
racks

Punch
wheel (small)

Punch
wheel (large)
Stereotyping
trays
Fig. 4.2: Transfer of results to output apparatus (simulation).

Results are transferred from the tabular figure wheels (the last even figure wheel column, far left,
Fig. 2.3) to the vertical racks (called ‘Printing Racks’ in A/172, top centre) by a transmission train
consisting in turn of tabular figure wheels, sectors, compound racks, pinions and spindles. At the
far end of the spindles is a set of vertical racks and pinions. (The compound racks are called
‘Figure Racks’ in the full Timing Diagram (F/385/1 and in A/174 top right). The printing racks
drive the printing wheels with which they mesh: each of the thirty racks is lowered by a distance
proportional to the associated figure wheel value. Lowering the rack drives the associated print
wheel to register the relevant digit value. The thirty printing wheels align to give a line of type
from which an inked impression is taken during the print cycle.
The printing wheels mesh with horizontal racks that transfer the digit values of the result to two
rows of thirty punch wheels, one small, one large (Fig. 4.3). At the appropriate point in the cycle

52

4 Output Apparatus

the punch wheels detach from the horizontal racks and are lowered to impress their settings into
the soft material held in trays below to provide a stereotype mould.
A full 30-digit result is impressed in
one action i.e. all digit positions are
impressed simultaneously.
(Babbage calls the number wheels
‘stereotyping sectors’ (A/172) as
only a portion of the circumference
of each wheel has embedded in it
ten heads embossed with the
numerals 0-9. In this account the
number wheels are called punch
wheels. The punch wheels have two
degrees of freedom only: rotational
and vertical: each punch wheel can

Fig. 4.3: Stereotyping punch wheels, large and small.

rotate about a horizontal axis to
position the correct digit, and they separate from the horizontal racks when they lower to
impress the result. The punch wheels do not move in the horizontal plane. Instead the
stereotyping trays are repositioned each cycle to receive a new result in a fresh location. The
apparatus provides two type-sizes, large and small. The two print pitches are fixed and are
unalterable at 1/8" and 1/16". The two sets of print heads act in tandem: both are lowered
together regardless of whether one, the other, or both print-heads actively impress. So, large
and small impressions can be taken in the same action, or one or another set of punch wheels
can be used separately.
The overall action of the transmission train between the calculating section and the output
apparatus is to transfers circular motion of the figure wheels, which rotate in a horizontal plane,
to circular motion of the printing wheels and to two sets of punch wheels, all of which rotate in a
vertical plane.
Main Drawings:

A/172, A/173,

Related Drawings: A/147, A/161, A/162, A/163, A/164, A/165, A/166, A/174, A/175, A/176

4.1 Transferring Results from the Calculating Section
At the start of the second half-cycle the tabular figure wheels (even axis) transfer digit

53

4 Output Apparatus

values to the last sector axis during evens-to-odds addition. Each sector rotates
anticlockwise (in plan) by the amount of the figure wheel digit value as the figure wheel is
reduced to zero. Instead of giving-off to the next odds figure wheel axis as do all the other
even axes, here the tabular axis gives off to the compound racks via the sector wheels with
which they mesh (Figs. 4.2, 4.4, 4.5).
Each of the compound racks has two
sets of teeth at right angles: vertical
Lock

teeth in the horizontal plane that
mesh with a sector wheel, and

Compound
racks

horizontal teeth in a horizontal plane
that mesh with an associated pinion

Pinions

(elevation A/174, Figs. 4.5, 4.6). The
pinions drive a set of horizontal

Spindles

spindles fitted with another set of
pinions at the far end. These mesh
with a set of vertical racks (printing
racks) shown in elevation in A/174
(left) and in plan in A/173 (centre)
(Fig. 4.7). The overall function of the
arrangement is to transfer the circular
displacement of the tabular figure

Fig. 4.4: Compound racks, pinions, spindles and vertical
Lock. View from rear (detail).

wheels into proportionate vertical
displacement of the racks.
The spindles are arranged vertically in pairs in two runs (Figs. 4.5, 4.7). The spindles for oddnumbered digits, 1, 3, 5, 7 . . . corresponding to units, hundreds, ten-thousands . . . form the
run closest to the front of the Engine and engage with the racks below (2N A/172 top
centre, A/174, and A/176); spindles for even-numbered digits, 2, 4, 6, 8 . . . . . corresponding
to tens, thousands, hundred-thousands . . . . are towards the rear of the Engine and engage
with the racks above (3M).
The printing racks for the odd-numbered digits are back-to-back with those for the evennumbered digits (A/172 elevation top centre, A/173 plan, centre). Each of the pinions
engages with a short run of teeth on the corresponding printing rack and both the pinions
and the rack teeth are vertically staggered as shown (A/174 left, Fig. 4.7).

54

4 Output Apparatus

Fig. 4.5: Transfer of tabular values from figure wheels to horizontal spindles (simulation).

Fig. 4.6: Transfer of tabular values to horizontal spindles (A/176) (detail).

The drive train in elevation in A/174 shows the four lower-most tabular figure wheels (units,
tens, hundreds and thousands) coupled digit-for-digit to the printing racks via the
transmission train. The upper section of the tabular column is not shown. While the tabular
column records a thirty-one-digit result there are only thirty printing racks shown in A/173
and elevation A/174 i.e. there is no provision in the drive train for the top-most digit and
this value is neither transferred nor printed.
The output sectors nS0 (A/176, Fig. 4.5) act as normal even sectors. Their drive and control

55

4 Output Apparatus

are identical to that of the even sector axes for the 2nd, 4th, and 6th difference sectors i.e.
they give off (to the transmission train) during addition of even to odd differences, restore
the tabular value to the tabular figure wheels by reducing to zero, and at the same time
return the compound racks and printing racks to their home positions. However, the output
sectors differ from those of the other three even axes sectors (S2, S4, S6, A/176) in respect
of depth of teeth, number of teeth, and angular orientation.
The opened-out view at the top of A/171 (Fig. 3.3) shows the standard calculating sectors
with two runs of teeth of different depths: the run of teeth that engage with the figure
wheels to the right are full depth, and those that engage with those on the left are single
depth, to allow partial disengagement in the intermediate vertical position (see 3.
Calculation, Sector Wheels, p. 27). By way of difference both runs of teeth on the output
sectors (nS0) are full depth (Elevation A/174 top right). Here the sectors, shown fully
raised, are disengaged from the tabular figure wheel but still engaged with the compound
racks. Unlike the other three sector columns the nS0 sectors remain fully engaged with the
racks throughout, whether or not engaged with the figure wheels. The need to fully
disengage the sectors from the lower order difference columns was to allow successive
additions to accumulate with each successive cycle i.e. disengagement allowed the sector
to restore the higher order difference without disturbing the lower order difference that
had just been the beneficiary of giving-off. In the case of the output sectors (nS0) there is
no such need and the printing racks need to remain fully engaged (via the transmission
train) with the output sectors to return the racks to the home position and to track sector
rotation as the sectors register results.
A second difference is that the output sectors have one more tooth than the standard
sectors. A/176 bottom left (Fig. 4.6) shows 13 sector teeth for engagement with the
compound rack while there are 12 teeth on other axes for the same section of the sector.
Finally, the angular orientation of the sector teeth that engage with the compound rack is
different (A/176, A/161): A/161 shows the limits of travel of the output sectors as bounded
by the solid line at eight o’clock and the dotted line at 27 minutes past; the limits of travel of
the other even sectors is shown as bounded by the solid line at 10-o’clock and the dotted
line at 7-o’clock. The sector zero stop on the output sectors (2M) is shown scalloped out to
accommodate maximum displacement of the sector (A/161, bottom left). The amount of
rotational travel of the output sectors is the same as that for the difference column sectors.
Only the orientation differs.

56

4 Output Apparatus

Locking the Compound Racks
The compound racks driven by the figure wheel sectors are shown in plan in A/176 (bottom
left, Fig. 4.5) and in elevation in A/174 (top right). These views show a single wedge-shaped
lock (5L A174 ‘Locking Bar’; also A/176) operating on the vertical stack of thirty racks. The
operation of the lock is driven by two of the fourteen cams in the output apparatus cam
stack. The lock is lifted and withdrawn by the angle crank (4V3 , 4V2 , A/174) turning on fixed
pivot 1V. The crank is driven by link 6H (A/174) which is in turn driven by the cam follower

V

rocker arm from conjugate cams 2A2, 2A3 (A/173). The cam profiles and follower arms (1
,

2

V ) are shown in A/172 as part of the general arrangement, and abstracted more clearly

1

3

in A/175. The axis of the pivots at each end of link 6H are at right angles to each other – a
questionable practice but the assumption is that the deviation from linear drive is
sufficiently small to be accommodated by play in the pivot.
The lock operates once each calculating cycle engaging at around 252° (Timing Diagram 337
X 21) and releasing at about 290°. Inked and stereotyped impressions are taken during this
interval i.e. while the compound racks are locked to freeze the current result.
A/174 does not show the upper section of the lock and therefore details of how the lock is
constrained to the vertical during operation are not given. To guide the lock the twin-armed
lock levers (4V1 , 4V2 A/176) and mounting bracket (A/176) were duplicated in the upper
section but the drive link, 6H, was not extended. The motion of the lock is therefore fixed by
the radial locus of the upper and lower lever arms, only the lower one of which is driven.

4.2 Printing Racks
The compound racks drive the next part of the transmission train i.e. the spindles. Pinons
at Engine end of the spindles mesh with the compound racks, and at the far end the mesh
with the printing racks which are displaced vertically to transfer the figure wheel values to
the printing wheels and to the stereotyping punches (Fig. 4.7).
Each printing rack has two short runs of teeth, one set in the upper section, the other in
the lower section. The teeth in the upper section mesh with the pinions pinned to the
horizontal spindles from the calculating section (A/174); the lower teeth mesh with the
‘printing sectors’ or printing wheels (A/172 centre, Fig. 4.9). The overall arrangement
transfers the circular motion of the tabular figure wheels to circular motion of the printing
wheels.

57

4 Output Apparatus

Reversed pinions

Compound racks
Lock

Rack
counterbalancing
weights

Additional spindle
bearings

Printing racks

Fig. 4.7: Compound
racks, pinions,
spindles and vertical
printing racks.
Oblique view, rear.

58

4 Output Apparatus

Only the lower section of the racks is shown (A/174) and it is assumed that all thirty
printing racks are run to the full height of the machine. The racks slide against each other
and the whole set is sandwiched between two vertical framing side-pieces 4P and 5P
(A/174) which act as constraining cheeks. The racks are further constrained by a guide-bar
(U) which threads through slots at the lower end of all the racks. The guide-bar acts as a
tie-rod for the assembly and constrains the vertical motion of the printing racks (A/174).
The guide-slots in the racks and rectangular cross-section of the guide bar is shown in
A/172 centre.
The nominal width of the rack pinions is 1/4" and the pitch of the racks is 1/8" (eight racks
per inch) i.e. the pinion teeth are nominally double the width of the of the rack teeth. The
increased width for the rack teeth is achieved by lapping adjacent racks in two mating Lshapes. Detail of the lapping is shown in A/173 (centre) (Fig. 4.8) which shows two pinions
(digits one and two) and three lapped pairs (digits one through six) in cross section. The
Pinion (tens)

Lapped racks

Fig: 4.8: Lapped racks (A/173) (detail) (colour added).

59

Pinion (units)

4 Output Apparatus

effect of lapping is to double the effective width of the gear teeth to twice the rack width.
With lapping, the rack teeth and pinions for the fifteen odd-numbered digits face the front
of the engine, and those for the fifteen even-numbered digits face the rear. Because odddigit spindles are driven by the compound racks from below, and even-digit spindles from
above, the odd spindles rotate in opposite directions for the same rotational direction of
odd and even figure wheels. With the printing racks back-to-back this is corrected so that
the clockwise rotation of the tabular figure wheels when reduced to zero, results in a
uniform downward displacement in the related printing racks for all digit positions.
In addition to lapping, alternate lapped rack pairs are shown offset (Fig. 4.8). The supposed
purpose of recessing alternate pinions between a pair of racks is to trap alternate pinions
in the guide channels formed by the racks on either side – this to reduce the risk of pinions
fouling adjacent racks due to side-play in the spindles. The offset is shown as carried
through to the printing wheels for which the racks act as guide channels.
The upper sections of the racks are geared only where needed as shown in A/174 i.e. each
rack has a short run of teeth positioned to mesh with its drive pinion. The same holds true
for the lower rack sections in A/172. The positions of the toothed sections on the upper
portions of the racks are staggered diagonally bottom right to top left across the face of
the rack assembly (A/174 left and Fig. 4.7). Printing racks are therefore not identical (337 K
332 A-Q).
The lapping arrangement was retained though offsetting alternate racks was ultimately
dispensed with and each of the faces of the racks are flush i.e. in the same vertical plane
(see Implications of Rack Offset, p. 61). With the racks no longer offset the staggering of
the spindles was also dispensed with.
The upper section of the rack assembly is not shown in A/172. The guide bar assembly,
which constrains the lower section of the racks, was not duplicated higher up. Rather the
upper section of the racks is trapped front-to-back between the two sets of pinions which
act as a restraining cage (A/172, top centre).
Length of Lapping
A/174 shows thirty racks 1/8" wide and pinions nominally 1/4" wide. In the L-shaped
lapping discussed earlier the fifteen odd-numbered racks (digits 1, 3, 5, ... , 29) face the
front (A/173 right. The least significant digit is represented on the right-most rack in
A/174), and the fifteen even-numbered racks face the rear. A/174 has solid lines at 1/8"

60

4 Output Apparatus

pitch to represent the rack members. This would indicate that only the rack sections that
are toothed for meshing with pinons are lapped: if the lapping was extended beyond the
toothed section the alternate vertical lines should be broken. However, the use of broken
lines to show hidden edges is not consistent elsewhere, and drawings are sometimes an
inconsistent mix of sectioned and diagrammatic views. Lapping was extended beyond the
toothed sections upward and downward but stopping short at the lower end where the
printing wheel racks revert to a true 1/8" pitch i.e. with no lapping flange. Details of the
racks as made are shown in 337 K 332 A–Q.
Implications of Rack Offset
The printing sectors (or printing wheels) are concentric and pivot on the same shaft (Fig.
4.9) so offsetting alternate racks alters the pitch circle of alternate sectors. Equal
downward displacements of the printing racks will therefore result in different angular
displacements of alternate printing wheels. A 0.2" difference in pitch circle radius (the size
of the offset) results in about a 2.5 difference between the angular displacement of a
sector set to print a ‘0’ and one set to print a ‘9’. If the pitch of the type heads was
identical for all the printing wheels then the ‘9’ would be positioned as much as a full
character height above an adjacent zero. This difference is clearly too large to be ignored.
To ensure that the type heads line up for equal rotations of odds and evens spindles would
require altering the pitch of the type heads on alternate printing wheels.
The locking arrangement would also need to be altered. A V-shaped locking bar inserts
into notches across the run of printing wheels (Fig. 4.9). To ensure that the common
locking bar will align with the V-notches whatever numbers are registered on any of the
printing wheels, the pitch of the locking notches would need to be altered for alternate
printing wheels. Only one printing wheel is shown in elevation A/172 and there is no
indication of a call for non-identical printing wheels to take account of the printing rack
offset shown in A/173.
If the purpose of offsetting alternate printing racks was to create channels whose sidewalls
would confine the pinions and prevent them fouling adjacent racks, then it could be argued
that the same design-need (or precaution) should apply to the arrangement for meshing
the printing wheels with the horizontal racks for transferring results to the two sets of
stereotyping punches (A/172 bottom). The teeth of the printing wheels remain in
engagement with the upper teeth of the horizontal rack throughout. However, both sets
of stereotyping punch wheels separate from the lower teeth of the horizontal rack when
lowered to make an impression in the tray below. Extending the benefits of the channel-

61

4 Output Apparatus

guide effect of offsetting alternate racks would assist alignment when the punch wheels
are raised to re-engage.

Locking lever
Locking bar
Locking V-notches
Printing racks
Printing wheels

Type heads

Horizontal racks

Punch wheels

Fig: 4.9: Printing wheels and racks (A/172) (detail).

The implication of offsetting alternate horizontal racks is that the pitch of the type heads
would need to be different for alternate punch wheels to ensure that they line up at six
o’clock for all the sectors whatever the number set up. As with the printing wheels, there
is no evidence in A/172, or elsewhere, of provision for non-identical stereotyping punch
wheels. The implications of printing rack offset do not seem to have been carried through
to the train for setting up the printing wheels or stereotyping punches, though the printing-

62

4 Output Apparatus

rack offset is explicit in the drawings.
The issue of how far into the drive train to extend the offset is resolved by the geometry of
the stereotyping punch wheels. In the case of the printing wheels the run of locking
notches is separate from run of type heads and the pitch of each of these can be separately
fixed. However, in the case of both small and large stereotyping punch wheels the locking
notches alternate with the type heads between which they interpose (n4B, 5B, A/172).
Increasing the pitch of the type heads on alternate punch wheels so that the type heads
align at the six-o’clock position for any combination of numbers, conflicts with the
alignment of the locking notches for the correct operation of the common locking bars of
the crab-claw lock on the smaller set of punch wheels (twenty-past the hour in A/172)
which operate across all the wheels i.e. the two separate conditions (the rotational
position of the punch wheel, and a fixed separate locking point) cannot both be satisfied if
the pitch circle of alternate sectors differs and the type heads alternate with the locking
notches. (The crab claw lock shown for the small punch wheels on the left is duplicated for
the punch wheels with larger type on the right (A/172) though this is not drawn.) The
duplication is inferred from the provision of the dovetail slide and driving mechanism from
the cams (see 5.4 Locks and Modifications to Printing Racks, p. 93).
In the case of the printing wheels the two conditions are reconciled by placing the
sequence of type heads and locking notches into separate groups. In the case of the
stereotyping punch wheels there is insufficient space on the circumference of the
significantly smaller stereotyping punch wheels to accommodate separate runs of type
heads and locking notches.
The upshot is that the printing wheels and horizontal racks, if implemented as drawn, must
be offset to correct for differing displacements of alternate printing wheels resulting from
offsetting alternate printing racks; but the offset should not be extended to the meshing of
the horizontal racks with the two sets of punch wheels on the underside. Alternate printing
racks, printing wheels and horizontal racks are therefore not identical, while punch wheels
for small type are identical as are the punch wheels for large type (337 K 383 A&B).
Dispensing with Rack Offset
The length of the pinion bushes is about 2.5". Four of these are shown in A/173 (top and
middle, centre), two at the Engine end and two (the first two) meshed with the racks. Being
the first two, their bosses are outside and clear of the rack assembly. For the undrawn
pinions there is barely any clearance between the bushes of the recessed pinions and the
adjacent pair of racks that form the cheeks of the guide. This is more clearly shown in A/172

63

4 Output Apparatus

centre top which shows minimal clearance between the cross section of the innermost
spindle (3M) and the teeth of the adjacent rack. Thinning the wall of the bush to 1/16"
would provide workable clearance but such a reduction was not thought prudent.
The simplifying solution adopted was to abandon offsetting alternate printing racks. Slightly
reducing the width of the printing racks’ pinions and chamfering the teeth were considered
sufficient precaution against pinions fouling adjacent racks.
The lower rack sections, which mesh with the printing wheels, do not have the benefit of
lapping and the rack teeth are only 1/8" across. Here the offset feature was retained to
provide sidewall guidance for the printing wheels. The benefit of offsetting is to reduce, by
providing guide channels, the need for critical manufacture and fitting. In the case of the
pinions, sufficient margins of clearance are available to justify removing the offset feature
and this solves the issue of wall-thickness of the pinion bushes. In the case of the printing
wheels, the offset was retained and the lower sections of racks are not identical for even
and odd powers of the digit positions (337 K 331 A-Q, 337 K 332 A-Q).
Counterbalancing the Printing Racks
There are two points in the cycle where there is a risk of runaway i.e. of uncontrolled
downward motion where the racks lower under their own weight. The upper sections of
the printing racks are not shown in A/174 but all thirty printing racks are assumed to be the
same length and run the full height of the engine. Each rack is in light contact with its
neighbours over their length and coupling through sliding friction was foreseen. The
contact surface between racks includes the additional surface from lapping adjacent pairs
(Fig. 4.8). The racks are made of steel and their collective weight in their unmodified form
is 41.4 lbs.
The printing wheels are returned to zero at the end of each cycle (Timing Diagram 337 X
21). In this position all printing racks are fully raised – the position shown in A/172. The
final (even) sector wheel is in its rest position i.e. full anti-clockwise (A/176) in its fully
raised position. Lifting the sector into the fully raised position lifts them clear of the figure
wheels and at the same time engages the sector lock (see 3. Calculation, Operation, p. 32).
With the sectors locked the printing racks are supported by the sectors via the
transmission train made up by the sector wheels, compound racks, spindles and pinions
(Fig. 4.2). The printing racks remain so supported until the start of the second half cycle i.e.
the adding of even differences to odds.

64

4 Output Apparatus

The first point at which there is a risk of runaway is during the transfer from the last even
sector column to the compound racks. The transfer from odd to even columns in the first
half-cycle sets the tabular value on the eighth column. The tabular value is transferred
from last even sector column to the compound racks (Fig. 4.6, A/176 detail) during the
second half-cycle i.e. during even to odd addition. The second half-cycle starts with the
tabular figure wheels, in general, displaced anticlockwise from zero), even sectors fully
raised (locked and disengaged from the figure wheels), and figure wheels locked.
The even sectors then fully lower to engage the figure wheels, figure wheel locks withdraw,
and figure wheel axes and zero stops lower. The expected next action is that the internal
arms of the figure wheel axis will drive the figure wheels to zero and, in doing so, drive the
printing racks via the sector wheels and transmission train in a controlled way. However,
when the figure wheel locks withdraw there is a risk that the racks drop under their own
weight and run ahead of the figure wheel internal drive arms. The effect would be for the
falling printing racks to drive the transmission train (compound racks, sector wheels, and
figure wheels) until the outer nibs of the figure wheels hit the zero stops. The worst–case
condition occurs with all figure wheels set at 9. Here all racks fall the full vertical travel of
2.827 inches. For figure wheels in positions other than 9 the distance the transmission
train will be driven will be in proportion to the figure wheel value. There is no evidence in
the original design drawings for measures taken to prevent runaway.
The printing racks are locked only in the timing window in which an inked impression is
taken and are unlocked for the rest of the calculating cycle (Fig. 3.2, 337 X 21). The locking
period is later than the short window of vulnerability and so the rack locks offer no
protection against runaway.
For the less mobile racks, friction-coupling would act to brake runaway neighbours.
Equally, friction coupling could produce an avalanche effect as less mobile racks join the
descent.
Runaway does not introduce either calculation or printing errors. The effect is simply to
accelerate the transfer of result values to the printing racks in an uncontrolled action
ahead of the rotation of the drive arms of the figure wheels, and for the figure wheels to
impact the zero stops with more than necessary force.
The second risk of runaway occurs during restoration after stereotyping. Once the tabular
value is transferred to the printing/stereotyping wheels, the printing-rack locks and figure
wheel locks secure the train and immobilise the mechanism while impressions are taken

65

4 Output Apparatus

(see Fig. 3.2 for calculation timing; F/385/1 for both calculation and output apparatus
timing). The locks then disengage, and the intended next action is for the sweeping sector
arm to engage with the drive pegs on the upper side of the sector wheels to restore the
tabular value and return the even sectors and printing wheels to zero. This is the second
risk-point for runaway. In general, individual sectors and printing racks will be displaced by
different amounts from zero during the course of a calculation. With the locks removed
and the figure wheel zero stops raised, the racks will tend to lower again under their own
weight and drive the train in reverse. The limit of the motion this time is not the figure
wheel zero stops but the advancing sector wheel restoring arm which will impact the drive
pegs.
Neither of the two runaway conditions introduces calculating or printing errors. In both
cases the restoring action of the drive arms will complete correctly. However, ramming of
the mechanism against the zero stops in the first case, and against the rotating sector
restoring arms in the second, is undesirable. There was also concern about the load on the
sector restoring arms of the racks when lifted after printing, as well as the overall load on
the main manual crank when the racks are collectively lifted and restored to zero.
To avoid the risk of runaway the precaution was taken, pre-build, to counterbalance the
deadweight of the racks by providing individual counter-weights for each rack. There is no
evidence in the original design for measures to prevent runaway.
Pulley-suspension for counterbalancing weights
Contemporary practice favoured using individual weights suspended by cords wound on
drums in the pinion shafts. Two factors weighed against this: the lowermost pinion shafts
have insufficient clearance for the full downward travel of the weights. Also, the
counterbalancing load is transmitted through the friction of the spindle bearings and pinion
gearing, and this force is variable. The arrangement preferred uses individual counterweights attached directly to each rack by a cord suspended over a pulley on a shaft above
(Fig. 4.7). The weights are long steel strips (8" x 1.5" x 0.5") and weigh 1.38 lbs each. Each
of two pulley shafts run left to right (front and rear) and carry fifteen 3"diameter phosphor
bronze pulleys 1/4" wide (337 K 322). Viewed from the left-hand end of the engine the
cords are centre-parted evenly to the front and rear.
Adjacent weights are in light contact and this discourages the tendency to spin. The
weights are suspended in two tiers i.e. fifteen weights in two tiers at the front (eight above
and seven below) and fifteen in two tiers at the rear. Channels cut down the faces in

66

4 Output Apparatus

contact (337 K 22 and K 21) allow paths for the cords to the lower tiers. The tops of the
racks are cut away and drilled with 1/6" holes for the cords. The purpose of the cut-away is
to ensure central suspension points to avoid listing (337 K 331, K 332).
Calculation confirmed that if the cords slackened momentarily when the racks were raised
the cords might jump the pulley wheels. A nine-digit upward movement of the rack
restoration corresponds to a lift of 2.827" in 60 of the cycle. In the first 0.01 seconds the
free-fall distance of the weight is 0.019" and the rack movement is 0.028" i.e. 0.009" cord
slack. The pulley channel depth is approximately 0.0625" i.e. the initial slack is insufficient
for the cord to jump the pulley.
An additional benefit of counterbalancing is the reduction of wear on the printing-rack locks,
compound racks, and figure wheel locks. Without counterbalancing, the locks would be
inserted against the weight of the racks and any correction for small derangements would
be made against this resistance. This additional load would accelerate wear as well as
increase the shock-load on the cam. Additional wear and load were considered to be
undesirable given the steep pressure angle of the lock cam profile and the inability (as was
found) to turn the engine without counterbalancing of the locks with additional springs (see
7. Drive, Counterbalancing Axes and Locks, p. 181). The provision of counterbalances for
the racks was taken to be consistent with the practice, in the original drawings, of providing
spring counterbalances for the figure wheel shafts.
Counterbalancing the Printing Racks – Re-evaluation
Before the build the main rationale behind the addition of counterbalancing weights was to
prevent runaway i.e. uncontrolled downward motion of the racks as they free-fall under
their own deadweight. It was also thought that the counterweights would relieve the load
on the locks that operate on the figure wheels, the printing racks, compound racks, and the
stereotyping punch wheel locks. The thinking here was that for small downward
derangements the locks would be inserted against the weight of the racks. This would
increase the load on the cams driving the locks and increase wear.
When the printing apparatus was assembled, fears about runaway proved ill-founded.
Stiffness in the drive train proved to be the most serious difficulty of the build: driving the
racks against resistance was the most enduring of the difficulties and, as it turned out,
masked several other issues right to the last. Before remedial measures were taken, the
forces required to drive the transmission train were sufficient to deform the internal drive
pegs of the last sectors.

67

4 Output Apparatus

The main cause of stiffness was from sliding friction between the racks. Surface tension
using any wet lubricant produced unexpectedly high resistance to sliding. Various wet and
dry lubricants were tried without success. Running-in the racks using an electric motor that
continuously exercised the racks was tried, also without success.
The solution adopted was a combination of skimming down the overall width of each rack,
selectively reducing contact surface area by milling recesses in the faces of the racks and
using dry graphite lubrication. Milling the racks to reduce thickness and provide relief
recesses released internal stresses and the racks distorted badly, twisting in several planes.
The racks were straightened by hand manipulating them to restore straightness.
With these relieving measures there was still residual stiffness that made runaway less of a
hazard. However, the counterbalancing weights were still justified on at least three counts:
1. as a precaution against runaway as the racks wear in and become freer.
2. to relieve the drive load on the sectors to lift the racks to zero.
3. to ease the insertion of the locks.
The worst-case deadweight loading occurs with an all-nines result. In this case the sectors
lift the full weight of all thirty printing racks for the full travel during restoration to zero. In
the all-nines case there is no sliding between the racks i.e. they all move as a block. If there
is a mix of digits, as is usual, the deadweight load is increased by the sliding friction between
the racks. Here the load on any individual sector accumulates as the restoration proceeds,
sweeping up the digits in descending order (i.e. 9s first) gathering racks which ramps up the
load as zeroising progresses. If the individual drive trains for each or the digit values was
entirely separate, as they would be if frictionless, then the worst-case load on each sector
would be no more than the deadweight load of one rack. It is the unavoidable coupling of
the racks to each other through sliding friction that increases the load on individual sectors
beyond the load of a single rack. The worst-case of rack-to-rack frictional loading occurs
when no two adjacent numbers are the same. Excessive loads would also cause ‘wind-up’ in
the spindles i.e. elastic twisting that could produce timing lags in the transmission. Looking
beyond the sectors, the contribution of lifting the racks, to the overall load on the main
crank, is also a consideration. Getting the printing racks back to zero and the inserting the
locks produced the largest stresses to the drive.
Counterbalancing the printing racks relieves the drive stresses and also relieves resistance to
insertion of the locks if these are slightly deranged from their aligned positions. Ragged
alignment of the printing wheels, despite the action of the counterweights, required
remedial modifications to the printing-racks lock and prompted an extended understanding

68

4 Output Apparatus

of its possible intended function. For rationale and modifications (see 5.4 Modifications to
Printing Racks Lock, p. 91).

4.3 Modifications to Spindle Assembly
The original design shows the spindles having a horizontal stagger i.e. alternate spindle are
offset front to back. A/172 (top centre) shows four spindles, units and hundreds on the
right (3M), tens and thousands on the left (2N). (The spindles for hundreds and thousands
at the upper edge of the drawing are shown without pinions). The two spindles on the right
are shown offset from each other, as are the two on the left i.e. the spindles in each of the
two sets, one to the front and one to the rear, are not in the same vertical plane.
Staggering the spindles is a result of carrying back the offset of alternate printing racks (7Z
A/172, Fig. 4.9). Dispensing with the rack offset dispenses with the need to stagger the
spindles which can now be in the same vertical plane. To reduce the risk of pinions catching
on adjacent printing racks, pinion teeth were thinned to 3/16" to engage with a 7/32" wide
rack-tooth. The compromise distance between the vertical centre-lines through the spindle
centres is 2.160" (337 K 321 A & B, 337 K 311).
Removing the spindle stagger removes the need for the D-shaped scalloped cut-outs in the
vertical framing pieces to accommodate the first few of the lower most pinion bushes – until
the stagger takes bushes clear of the framing member. Examples of scalloping the frame are
shown for two of the four pinions in A/172 (top centre).
There is also a correction to be made to the compound racks at the sector-wheel end as a
result of removing the spindle stagger. The mirroring solution to the layout flaw (3.5
Resolution of the Layout Design Error, p. 47) in the basic addition mechanism required a
2¼° rotational correction applied to the sector and figure wheels so that the centre-line
symmetrically bisected either a tooth or a tooth-gap for both odd and even axes. This is
carried through to the smaller of the compound racks: the centre-line of the rack tooth gap
is moved to the centre-line of the sector wheel i.e. not as shown in A/176. The corrected
layout is shown in 337 K 312, 337 K 313.
Additional Spindle Bearings
The original designs show the spindles supported by bearings at each end: one set near the
compound racks at the figure wheel end of the Engine fixed to the framing pieces (P, A/174

69

4 Output Apparatus

top right), and one set (R) on the far left of the framing for the printing racks (A/174 far
left). Only the lower few of the thirty spindles are shown in A/174 and It is also not clear
how the bearing strips (R) fix to the main frame (5P) nor whether the strips are a single
unbroken run or divided into sections, each for a group of spindles.
For ease of assembly and dismantling, six separate bearing strips were used, each drilled to
take five spindles (Fig. 4.7). Three of these are mounted vertically in line on the outside of
the vertical rack frame towards the front of the machine. These support the fifteen spindles
for the odd power digits 101, 103 . . . , 1015. The second set of three is located behind these
and supports the spindles for the even powers (100, 102 . . . , 1030).
The torsional load on the spindles depends on the stiffness of the train and the weight of
(counterbalanced) printing racks and there was concern was that spindles might bow under
excessive load. If the spindles bowed sufficiently, as they are likely to do should the racks
jam or in the event of undue stiffness, there was concern that pinions might ride up over the
rack teeth. It was thought preferable to allow the Engine to jam by preventing the spindles
from bowing than for the pinons to damage the rack teeth by overriding.
As a precaution against bowing an additional set of six separate bronze bearing strips was
fitted to better support the spindles (337 K 571 A&B). These mirror those already described
and are mounted on the right side of the frame for the printing racks (Fig. 4.7). As described
above the spindle stagger was dispensed with. The original and the additional spindle
bearings are in the same plane i.e. the centres of the spindle shafts are vertically aligned.
If the spindle bearings were set in the cast frame the pinions would need to be unpinned to
remove the printing racks. Dismountable bearings strips allow the spindles to be removed
while keeping the pinning undisturbed. In the arrangement shown (Fig. 4.7) spindles can
be removed in groups of five. The bearing strips are dowelled in place to for precise and
repeatable registration.

70

5 Printing

5.

Printing

The printing apparatus produces inked hardcopy on a paper print roll (Fig. 2.6, p. 16). The
printed copy is used for checking results and as a record of the same results impressed in the
stereotyping trays (Fig. 2.17, p. 16).
Each calculating cycle transfers thirty-digit results to the printing wheels from the figure
wheels of the results column. Once the printing wheels are set up with a result there are
three distinct operations that make up the print cycle:
1. Inking
2. Printing (taking an inked impression)
3. Paper feed.
The inking system is located immediately above the paper management mechanism (Figs. 5.1,
5.2). The inking process uniformly loads the surface of the inking roller with relatively highviscosity ink held in an ink bath. Once loaded the inking roller arcs downwards to deposit ink
on the line of type presented by the print wheels. After the inking roller has retracted to its
Ink bath

Inkpot roller

Transfer roller

Printing racks

Counterbalance

Spreader
roller

Roller bar

Feed drum

Inking
roller
Print
wheels

Take-up
spool

Fig. 5.1: Apparatus for inked printout (simulation).

71

5 Printing

raised position, the paper mechanism arcs upwards to take an impression by pressing the
roller bar, around which the paper is looped, against the print wheels (Fig. 5.3). The paper
mechanism then retracts to its lowered position. The retraction of the paper mechanism to its
lowered position automatically advances the paper roll by one line in preparation for the next
printing cycle. There is one printing cycle for each calculating cycle. There is no buffering or
storage of results: each result is printed during the calculating cycle that generates it.
The layout of the printed results is fixed i.e. line-height, margins, and font are unalterable and
results are printed one per line in a continuous single column with no blank lines between
groups of lines (Fig. 2.6, p. 16).

Inking
Mechanism

Printing
wheels

Paper
System

Fig. 5.2: Printing apparatus.

The general arrangement is illustrated in Figs. 5.1, 5.2. The inking, paper management, and
printing mechanism is shown in the right-hand half of elevation A/172 (excerpted in Fig. 5.3
below), and bottom right plan A/173.
Main Drawings:

A/172, A/173, A/165

Related Drawings: A/163, A/164, A/174, A/175, A/176.

72

5 Printing

5.1 Inking
The purpose of the mechanism is to ink the line of type presented by the printing wheels
to which each thirty-digit result is transferred once each cycle.
The inking mechanism shown in Fig. 5.2 (A/172) incorporates a cluster of four rollers: the
inkpot roller, transfer roller, spreader roller and finally the inking roller (Fig. 5.3). The ink
supply is held in a reservoir formed by four components: the inkpot roller (1L) a scraper
plate which bears on the axial surface of the roller to ensure uniform distribution of ink
and to trap debris, and two side cheeks (not shown in Fig. 5.3). The ink is sufficiently
viscous to prevent leakage past the scraper, an arrangement typical of its time. The ink
bath has a flip-up dust cover with a curled lip for lifting.
The ink-pot roller bears on a second roller, the transfer roller (5J), which itself bears on a
third roller, the spreader roller (3K), which makes the final transfer of ink to the inking

J ) (Fig. 5.3).

roller (3

The final inking roller is propelled onto the line of type set up with the thirty-digit result.
The inking roller swings on two arms 1K1 , 1K2, pinned to shaft 1K (A/172, A/173 top
right) which is supported at each end by the two outer framing members (1J2, 3J2) i.e. the
shaft spans the full width of the apparatus. The arms and linkages driving the
downwards sweep of the inking roller are shown in elevation A/171 top right. The shaft is
driven by a lever arm (1K3) itself driven by link P which pulls the roller onto the line of
type. The arc of the roller trajectory is shown in A/172 (Fig. 5.3). (See 5.5 Cams, Drive
and Control, p. 96).
There is detail missing from the mechanisms as shown in the drawings. While the drive
train for the inking roller is shown, there is no detail for the remaining three rollers with
respect to drive, whether motion is intermittent or continuous, or the composition of the
roller material. Missing detail was supplied before the build during the design phase, and
other remedial modifications were introduced after the first commissioning trials as
described below.
Modifications to Ink Feed
A review of mid-19th-century printing practice indicated that inking would be too heavy if
the feed was continuous. No provision is made in the drawings for a method of driving
the inking system and an intermittent rather than continuous drive was provided for the
inkpot roller to slow the ink feed.

73

5 Printing

Ink bath
Spreader roller
Scraper
Inkpot roller

Transfer
roller

Inking
Mechanism

Inking roller

Arc of travel
Rollerbar

Print wheels
Take-up
drum

Backstop
ratchet
Paper
path

Feed pawl

Feed drum

Paper
System

Fig. 5.3: Inking and paper system (A/172) (detail).

74

5 Printing

The drive for the inkpot roller is derived from an eccentric added to the main printer cam

U (bottom of

shaft (2D A/172, 173 centre, Fig. 5.4) outside the inking roller drive arm 4

3

A/173). The arrangement is shown in assembly drawing 337 K 25 top left. The
reciprocating motion of the link operates a pawl which advances a ratchet (Fig. 5.5). The
amount of rotation of the ink pot roller during each printing cycle is adjustable by altering
the position of the sliding pivot on the slotted lever (337 K 446) using the knurled
thumbscrew. This alters the pull-back of the pawl and the motion transmitted to the

Fig. 5.4: Inkpot roller drive (before anti-bounce
and printing racks lock modification).

Eccentric
paw

Reciprocating drive link

roller. The inkpot and spreader roller are actively driven from the ratchet wheel shaft via
a short shaft and separate gear wheels i.e. the inkpot roller is not driven directly by the
ratchet shaft but via gearing. The spreader roller is also geared to the ratchet drive shaft.
Reverse rotation is prevented by a backstop pawl (337 K 448). The remaining two rollers
are slaved (friction driven) i.e. do not have independent drives. The ratchet drive for the
inking system was drawn up in the design phase i.e. in advance of the build.
It is not clear from A/172, A/173 or A/165 whether the roller bar (F) is intended to
rotate or not. A/172 suggests that it was intended to rotate driven by the paper advance.
However, to reduce possible unevenness in ink density across the face of the type wheel
from the curvature of the roller, the preference was to provide a fixed bar with a flat so
as to act as an anvil for the type-heads. The flat consists of an insert strip made from
composite material with some plasticity (Fig. 5.14).

75

5 Printing

Since the ink-feed ratchet drive is derived from the main output apparatus cam-shaft,
itself geared to the main Engine drive shaft, the ink-feed runs all the time the printer is
driven.

Ink feed
adjustment

Reciprocating
drive link
Ink bath

Priming
knob

Ratchet
Counterweight

Fig. 5.5: Inking feed adjustment.

Spreader Roller
Contemporary 19th-century practice printing machinery evidences at least one roller in
the inking train having reciprocating axial motion during rotation to ensure a uniform
spread of ink. The combined rotational and sliding motion was intended to eliminate
dead spots which would remain
as un-inked bands on the roller
surface.

Helical
cams

There is no provision in the
Spreader
roller

drawings for a reciprocating
sliding spreader roller, and an
oscillating spreader mechanism
was added at the design stage.
This consists of two cams, one at
each end of the roller shaft, that

Fig. 5.6: Spreader roller reciprocating drive.

76

5 Printing

drive the shaft axially to and fro (Fig. 5.6. Assembly Drawing 337 K 25, parts 337 K 428, K
429). The cams are circular 360 cams with sections of left- and right-handed helices.
The cams ride against two pegs fixed to a support bar above the roller. The angular
position of the cams and position of the pegs is such that the sliding roller is alternately
driven left by one cam and right by the other as a consequence of the roller turning. The
spreader roller is gear-driven from a gear on the shaft of the intermittent motion ratchet
drive for the inking roller i.e. it does not rely on rolling friction to rotate.
An additional contemporary practice was to alternate the consistency of the rollers: the

J ) would be soft to ensure uniform inking of the print heads, the ink pot

final roller (3
roller (1

L ) would be hard so as to aid sealing against the scraper by providing a true

surface, and intermediate rollers would alternate in consistency — hard-soft-hard etc.
Hard rollers were typically made of steel, and soft rollers from a toffee-like composition.
The possibility of eliminating the two intermediate rollers (5J, 3K) and modifying the final

J ) to act as a spreader was rejected: there is no lateral room for cams

inking roller (3

between the swinging levers that support the inking roller, and the inking roller cannot
be shortened as it needs to span the full width of the thirty print wheels (A/172). The
need for a separate spreading roller requires an additional transfer roller to maintain the
practice of alternating soft and hard rollers.
Since the final inking roller is soft, the spreader roller,
3

K, should be hard and the transfer roller, 5J, soft.

The soft roller has a less defined surface, is subject to
greater wear, and relies on pressure to ensure even
surface contact on the two rollers it couples. To
accommodate these marginal variations from a true
cylinder, the soft roller has a floating bearing (Fig. 5.7).
The spreader roller, 3K is steel and the transfer roller,

Fig. 5.7: Floating bearing.

5 , is sheathed with a firm but yielding compound.

J

The assembly of the inking system is shown in 337 K 25. The cluster of rollers is
supported by two cast mountings added to the castings for the printer framing members
(detail K416 A&B). The detail of the mountings is copied from the mountings shown for
the paper-feed take up roller immediately below. The transfer roller (5J ) rests in a cradle
which is part of a rocker mounting (detail 337 K 436). The transfer roller has a
counterweight (Fig. 5.5) added (337 K 439) which allows the roller to bear with constant
pressure on the spreader roller (3K ) and inkpot roller (1L) . Raising the counterweight

77

5 Printing

lowers the transfer roller clear of the other rollers, and the cradle arrangement allows
the roller to be lifted out for cleaning.
The ink blade or scraper (337 K 419) is mounted on bronze side cheeks (337 K 418 A&B)
which act as the sidewalls of the ink reservoir, and also seal against the curve of the
roller. The side cheeks insert into slots and the ink feed is adjusted by adjusting two
jacking screws (337 K 423).
Anti-bounce Mechanism
The inking roller is driven in a downward arc (Fig. 5.3, A/172). The drive train consists of
a rotating cam arm (2A16, A/172, K575) keyed to the main printer cam shaft (2D) and
which acts on the wish-bone contact follower-and-lever (4U 2, 4U 3 ) connected to a long
drive link (P ) the far end of which is connected to a short pivoting arm (1K3 ) that pulls
the inking roller downward onto the line of type. At the cam end the follower is driven
against the action of compression spring (1F). The profiles of the follower and cam are
such that the downward travel of the inking roller is relatively gradual while the return to
the home position is a snap action as the rotating cam arm sweeps past the end of the
follower and the compression spring is released.
The spring (1F A/172) has two functions: it provides contact pressure between the inking
roller and the sliding roller while in the home position, and it restores the inking roller to
its raised position after the downward sweep to the type heads.
When retracting after the downward stroke, the
inking roller has to clear the path of the paper
roller on its upwards arc. The timing and the
clearance are tight and during trials it was found
that the inking roller was unable retract fast
enough to clear the rising paper roller and the two
fouled. To speed the return of the inking roller a

Print
wheels

counterweight (Fig. 5.8) was added to the shaft
(1K) which drives the inking roller arms.The
accelerated retraction allowed the inking roller to

Fig. 5.8: Inking roller counterweight.

clear the print roller without fouling but, under the
combined action of the spring and the counterweight, the inking roller rebounded off the
spreader roller to again foul the paper roller i.e. the bounced inking roller caught behind
the paper roller as the paper roller retracted and the two rollers jammed. An anti-bounce

78

5 Printing

mechanism was devised and installed to trap the inking roller in its rest position against
the spreader roller.
The principle of the mechanism is to trap the knuckle of the inking roller drive-link in its
rest position to prevent bounce back (337 M 21 assembly). The main components are the
release plate (337 M 396) and
the bounce catcher (M 397). The
anti-bounce mechanism is driven
by the printer cam shaft, 2D, (Fig.
5.4) which continuously rotates
anti-clockwise while the Engine is
Fig. 5.9: Catcher plate (M397).

running (A/172). The catcher plate pivots freely
on the cam shaft. The scalloped rear section
(lower section in 337 M 397) acts as a
counterweight and biases the catcher plate so
that in its rest position the curved shoulder traps
the drive link with the inking roller in its
retracted position. The knuckle, in its trapped
position, is on the curve of the catcher plate and

Fig. 5.10: Release plate (M396).

stops the catcher plate from rotating anticlockwise any further. With the catcher in this position the drive link is inoperative i.e. it
cannot retract to drive the inking roller on its downward arc. If not released, the next
sweep of the cam arm would cause a jam.
The link is released by the action of the bronze release plate. The release plate pivots on
a pin in the inkpot roller drive link (Figs. 5.10, 5.11) which, driven by the eccentric cam,
reciprocates back and forth to operate the drive pawl for the inkpot roller (see 5.1 Inking,
Modifications to Ink Feed, p. 73). The motion of the drive link produces a compound
motion of the release plate in which the plate moves anticlockwise and backwards to
begin with the (the eccentric rotates anticlockwise) so as to hook the upper flat over the
fixed release pin, and then clockwise and downwards to release the drive link from the
shoulder of the catcher plate. The plate is released a little before the drive arm begins to
propel the inking roller on its downward arc and remains in its released position until the
knuckle of the drive arm retracts to begin the inking cycle. With the release plate
displaced a few degrees clockwise, the knuckle of the drive link rides the curved shoulder
of the catcher plate which is driven clockwise by the knuckle and held in contact with the

79

5 Printing

knuckle by the counterweight, which
Release pin

tries to rotate it anti-clockwise. The

Upper flat

release plate moves forward so that
the flat that depressed the release
pin is well clear. When the inking
roller drive-link, driven by the
compression spring, snaps back, the

Inkpot
roller drive
link

counterweighted catcher plate drops
back into the trapping position and
Fig. 5.11: Anti-bounce mechanism.

the shoulder of the curve traps the
knuckle in the rest position. The

curved cutout between the two flats on the inside of the release plate is to give clearance
for the release pin during the compound motion of the release plate.
Modification to Inking Roller Arms
Trials showed that inking of the
printing wheels was not uniform
across the face of the print heads
partly because the cylindrical
inking roller was bearing on a
plane surface, and ink deposition
was denser along the centre-line
of the printed result. The inking
roller swinging arms were

Fig. 5.12: Inking roller arms.

modified to allow adjustment of
their length so that the line of impact along the type face can be adjusted up or down,
and the ends of the arms were slotted to allow the roller to wipe upwards across the face
of the print heads on contact pressure with the print heads (Fig. 5.12).

5.2 Printing Stroke
The general arrangement of the paper management system is shown in elevation A/172
excerpted in Fig. 5.3 and a partial plan in A/173. A/165 (bottom centre) has the most
detailed views labelled Fig. 7 Elevation and Fig. 6 End View. Fig. 7 Elevation shows the
mechanism in the fully raised position, as when taking an impression, as seen from the
front of the Engine. Fig. 6 End View shows the mechanism as viewed looking left to right

80

5 Printing

in solid line fully raised, and dotted in the rest position.
The paper path is shown in A/172 and A/165. Paper is threaded from the roll wound on

F

feed drum 6 , around the roller bar, F, and onto the take-up drum 4H (Fig. 5.3). The
relationship between the axes of the two drums and the roller bar is fixed i.e. the two
arms, 7D1 and 7D2, carry the shafts of the drums and roller, and fix the relative positions.
During the printing stroke the whole assembly moves as a unit i.e. there is no relative
motion between the drums and the roller.
To print a result the whole mechanism turns on the fixed shaft (D12) and propels the
printing roller in a circular arc to press against the line of type heads. The position of the
assembly at the completion of the upstroke is shown as the solid view in A/165, Fig. 6.
The upstroke is driven from the single heart-shaped cam, 2A4 in A/175, and in plan as
part of the cam stack towards the top of A/173 (see 5.5 Cams, Drive and Control,
Printing Stroke Drive, p. 97). A train of links and arms transmits the drive to the drum
assembly. The angle of the elbow of the follower arm (H1, H2 A/172) is fixed and the
two fixed pivots in the train are the follower arm pivot (4B) and the take-up drum axis,
7

D (A/172, A/173). The two floating pivots are the forked knuckles at the ends of drive
link 2J. The follower arm, H1, pivots on 4B and drives link 2J diagonally downwards,
and arm 7C 1, keyed to shaft 7D, levers the drum into the upstroke.
The assembly passes through and beyond top dead centre during the upstroke (A/165,
Fig. 6) and the upstroke is halted by the roller bar meeting the print. The swinging arms
with the two drums and roller-bar pass beyond the vertical as shown in Fig. 6 , A/165.
The drive is unidirectional i.e. the return stroke is not actively driven, and the assembly
would remain at rest if the return stroke was unaided. To avoid the assembly being
stranded in the printing position, a spherical counterweight is provided to initiate the
return stroke. The counterweight, 7C 2, is shown as a circle in elevation A/172 right
bottom, and in plan in A/173 top right. The counterweight is fixed to a lever arm of one
piece with the boss (7C, A/173). The counterweight acts on the shaft on which the whole
mechanism pivots and the return stroke is a controlled descent restrained by the return
pressure of the cam follower on the retreating profile of the heart-shaped cam (A/175).
During the return stroke the roller bar retraces the trajectory of the upstroke. The rest
position at the end of the return stroke is determined by the end stop 7C 3 which bears
on the vertical frame (A/172 bottom right). Plan view (A/173) does not show the end
stop lever but the notation indicates that it is part of the ball-weight lever assembly (7C 2,
A/172).

81

5 Printing

5.3 Paper Feed
Of the feed drum and the take-up drum, the take-up drum is the more complex assembly
consisting as it does of a series sleeves and drums rotating around each other. The main
drawing for the paper feed system and the take-up drum assembly is A/165, Fig. 7 .
There are several details missing and aspects of the nested arrangement are not
immediately evident. Fig. 7 has been repeated here (Fig. 5.13) coloured to show the
separate assemblies.

Fig. 5.13: Paper take-up drum assembly (A/165) (colour added).

Each of the two swinging arms, 7D1 , 7D2 , (A/165, Fig. 7 ) have long bosses pinned at
each end (outside the swinging arms) to the shaft 7D, the central shaft of the take-up
drum assembly. The two bosses extend inside the arms, sleeving the shaft, and meet in
the middle. A second assembly, which runs the full width between the two swinging
arms, is sleeved over the boss and is free to rotate on the shaft formed by the boss. This
second assembly consists of a sleeve, a ratchet wheel (2I, A/165 Fig. 6, Fig. 7 ), and

E

gearwheel 2E (Fig. 7 right). The gear wheel (2E ) meshes with a similar gear wheel (6 )
fixed to the feed drum (
take-up drum (4

F ). The third part of the nested assembly is the barrel of the

6

H). This thin-walled outer drum rotates on the sleeve which carries the

second assembly. Trapped in a recessed annulus between the take-up spool and the
sleeve is a clock-spring (3G) (Fig. 7 right) pinned, at one end, to the inside of the take-up
drum, and to the sleeve of the second assembly at the other. The wound clock-spring
biases the take-up spool to rotate anticlockwise (A/172, A/165 Fig. 6 ) to maintain
positive tension on the paper. A feed pawl (5L) pivots on the question-mark bracket 3K

82

5 Printing
(A/172) and is biased by a leaf spring (5E) to engage with the teeth of the ratchet wheel.
The boss on the side with the ratchet wheel (A/165, Fig. 7 left) has a cam fixed to it
(A/165, Fig. 6 ) the outline of which is shown in two positions, dotted and solid.
The final piece of the assembly is a backstop pawl (3I, A/165 Fig. 6 ) (also A/172) which
engages with the ratchet teeth under pressure from a second leaf spring (A/172, 3H).
The backstop pawl holds the ratchet and gear assembly in fixed relation to the swinging
arms during the upstroke. It ensures that the assembly moves as a unit during the
printing stroke with no relative motion between the drums.
The solid cam-outline shows the position of the cam with the assembly raised (A/165).
During the upstroke the cam disengages the feed pawl (5L) by lifting it clear the teeth of
the ratchet wheel (solid view in A/165, Fig. 6 ). Towards the end of the return stroke the
cam releases the feed pawl to engage with the ratchet wheel (dotted view A/165, Fig. 6,
and solid in A/172). This halts and holds the ratchet wheel in the position at engagement
and for the rest of the stroke the ratchet wheel and gear wheel (2E), attached to the
ratchet shaft, remain stationary. In returning to the rest position the remaining travel of

E

the swinging arms moves the feed-drum so that its gear wheel (6 ) is driven against the
stationary gear (2

E ) so as to drive the feed drum clockwise (as in A/172) i.e. the feed

drum and stationary gear act as planet and sun gears,. The feed pawl, which is fixed to
the stationary framework, and therefore immobile, acts as the leverage point. The
backstop ratchet is overridden in this last motion. The feed drum is driven clockwise and
feeds a short length of paper from the roll. The paper is taken up by the take-up drum
driven by the clock-spring, so tension is maintained.
The action of the pawls, ratchets and gears in arcing up to take an impression and
returning to its rest position automatically advances the paper roll by one line-height
interval. Tension is maintained by the sprung take-up drum. The outcome is to present,
at the end of each print cycle, a fresh area of paper on the roller bar ready for the next
impression.
The incremental length of paper wound on depends on the fixed angle through which the
feed drum is driven at the end of the return stroke and the diameter of the paper roll on
the feed drum. As the paper stock depletes, the length of paper fed during each printing
cycle, and therefore the line height, will vary slightly. The direction of the variation will
be to reduce line height as the calculation run progresses.

83

5 Printing

Modifications and Additions
Several details are omitted in the drawings for the paper system. Specifically in A/165
no method is shown of fixing the cam to the boss on the main shaft 7D, or of fixing the
ratchet wheel (2I ) or gear (2E) to the sleeve, and no provision is made for loading the
paper stock onto the feed drum. The feed drum is not detachable (A/172, A/173) so
loading, using prepared stock on hollow formers, was clearly not intended. The paper
needs to be wound onto the feed drum from an external magazine but no means of
turning the feed drum is shown. The feed drum is wound anticlockwise to load it. Since
the feed drum is geared to the ratchet assembly of the take-up drum, attempting to turn
the feed drum anticlockwise drives the mechanism against the feed pawl which blocks
motion in the required direction. To freely rotate the drum the feed pawl and back-stop
pawl need to be released and there is no provision made for this. Finally, there is no
detail given for a method of securing the ends of the paper roll to either the feed drum or
to the take-up drum.
Mechanisms for releasing the backstop pawl, loading paper stock from an external
magazine, and securing the ends of the paper role, were added to the original design.
The general assembly of the revised arrangement is shown in 337 K 24.
Modifications to the Take-up Drum
Several modifications were made to the take-up drum to make provision for omitted
features, ease of manufacture, assembly and maintenance. None of the modifications or
additions has any implications for the basic design, which is sound.
Securing the paper-roll ends
No provision is made in the original drawings for securing the end of the paper roll to the
feed drum or the take-up drum. The preferred method of securing the paper was by a
cross-clamp acting as a tenon into an open slot running across the drum (Fig. 5.14). The
paper is trapped under the clamp which is fixed at each end by two screws let into cast
lugs in the drum. The curvature of the outer surface of the clamp follows the drum
radius so that the cylinder of the spool, interrupted by the mortise slot, is restored with
the clamp installed. The mounting lugs are mirrored on the opposite side of the drum for
balance (for detail see 337 K 481A).

84

5 Printing

The cross-clamp arrangement
for securing the paper to the
take-up drum is duplicated on

Cross clamp

the feed drum but without the
complication of the clock-spring
chamber. In this case the face
of the gear boss serves as a
location reference when

Winding
handle

Tenon
strip

loading the paper roll.

Roller bar

Loading Paper

Fig. 5.14: Roller bar and cross-clamp to secure paper ends.

The drawings make no provision for loading the feed drum. The drawing for the feed
drum (A/165, Fig. 7 ) has an inscription “printing paper coiled on this barrel at the
commencement” but there is no indication as to how this is to be done. The feed drum
has fixed gearing to the ratchet wheel which is itself constrained by two sprung pawls.
Loading the feed drum requires counter-clockwise rotation – motion blocked by the feed
pawl (A/172, 5L) which is engaged when the assembly is in the rest position. Turning the
feed drum is also resisted by the action of the backstop pawl (3I, A/165 Fig. 6 ) (also
A/172).
Facilities for paper loading were introduced at the design stage: provision is made for
releasing the two pawls, a detachable magazine (Fig. 5.15) for the reserve paper stock
from which paper is loaded, and a winding handle is fitted to coil the paper on the feed
drum. The general arrangement is shown in 337 K 24 with details of the magazine in 337
K 58.
The detachable magazine consists of two
side cheeks separated by three spacers, a
loose top roller and two wooden cradles
which support the paper roll. The
magazine is lowered onto the printing
mechanism and locates in two additional
slots machined into the paper support bar
which is not free to turn.
Fig. 5.15: Detachable paper-loading magazine.

85

5 Printing

The feed drum is wound anticlockwise to load from the magazine. Since the take-up
spool is geared to the feed drum, both the backstop pawl and the feed pawl need to be
disengaged to allow free rotation of the drums. The feed pawl is disabled by halting the
calculating cycle before the printing mechanism is fully lowered i.e. before the feed pawl
cam releases the pawl for engagement.
No additional mechanism is required for
this. It may be desirable to rotate the
drums at points in the cycle other than
when the feed pawl is automatically
released by the cam, during paper loading
for example, or to clear jams. So a pawl
release lever was added (337 K 24, detail
K 591, Fig. 5.16). If it is more convenient
to halt the cycle with the paper drums in
their rest position where the feed pawl is
still engaged, the feed pawl can be
disengaged and held in its released
position by hand while paper is wound

Fig. 5.16: Pawl release lever.

from the magazine onto the feed drum
(this is the technique described in the User Manual (2013), 5 Operating the Output
Apparatus, p. 45).
The release lever for the backstop pawl (detail K591) is loosely mounted on the ratchet
boss with clearance between the swinging arm and the ratchet wheel. There was space
enough to accommodate the lever without modification to the layout. The ramp on the
lever (337 K 24) lifts the pawl out of engagement when the lever is operated. The lever is
held by a pin in the swinging arm which enters a travelling slot in the lever (K 591).
During loading the direction of rotation (clockwise) biases the lever to hold the pawl in
the disengaged position.
Paper is wound onto the feed roller from the magazine by turning the handle pinned to
the feed drum shaft. The handle is an addition to the original design (Figs. 5.14, 5.15).
The detailed procedure for securing the paper stock and replenishing the paper supply is
described and illustrated in the separate User Manual (2013), 5. Operating the Output
Apparatus, pp. 42-46.

86

5 Printing

Clock-spring chamber
Accommodating the cross-clamp for securing the paper roll end required minor changes
in some axial and radial dimensions of the assembly as well as modification to the
assembly of the clock-spring chamber. For convenience of machining the mortise for the
cross-clamp requires runout off the end of the drum. With the clock-spring chamber
integral with the drum, the cross-clamp would form a segment of the chamber outer
wall. This would expose the spring when the clamp is removed, for paper stock
replenishment, for example, and run the eventual risk of fouling the spring through the
accumulation of paper dust and other debris. Instead of keeping the chamber and barrel
as one as in A/165, it was thought preferable to assemble the clock-spring, chamber and
gear as a separate unit. Separating the spring chamber simplifies manufacture of the
main chamber of the drum and has the advantage of allowing runout when machining
the mortise slot. Stopping the clamp short of the spring chamber prevents exposure of
the spring that would otherwise occur when the clamp is removed for paper loading. The
arrangement has the additional advantage of allowing the spring, gear and spring
housing to be preassembled; the spring is rivetted at one end to the outer wall, and
slotted at the other end into the inner sleeve. A further incidental benefit of separating
the spring chamber is that with the cross clamp removed, the side of the spring housing
acts as a location reference for positioning the paper during clamping (337 K 24, 337 K
59).
The take-up drum and the clock-spring chamber are assembled as a sandwich between
the two swinging arms which act as side pieces. The gear (2E ) forms the outer radial
wall of the spring chamber instead of the end plate (A/165) which was dispensed with.
The clock-spring chamber is driven by a pin let into the drum and protruding into the
spring chamber wall. The larger diameter of the pin is secured in the body of the barrel
by an interference fit. The reduced diameter is a clearance fit into the chamber wall. The
shoulder formed by the reduced diameter prevents the pin drifting into the spring
housing.
With a type pitch of 1/8", thirty printed digits and 1/4" margin each side, the width of
paper roll is 4¼". To allow clamping across the full 4¼" width, and at the same time retain
the original spacing of the two swinging arms, the clock-spring chamber was crowded
closer to the gear than as shown in A/165 so as to clear the right-hand edge of the clamp.
The width of the clock-spring and the size of the chamber remains unchanged.

87

5 Printing

Ratchet wheel
The assembly of the ratchet sleeve is not clear from A/165. The ratchet wheel (2I ) is
shown as one with the sleeve (A/165, Fig. 7 , left, Fig. 5.13). The ratchet teeth need to be
hardened. For ease and economy of manufacture the ratchet wheel is made as a
separate item from high-grade hardenable steel and secured to the standard-steel barrel
with three screws. The ratchet wheel is therefore replaceable as a separate item. At the
ratchet end, the steel sleeve runs on the cast iron boss of the swinging arm which is an
approved match of materials. The gear (2E, A/165, Fig. 7 , right) is shown as separate but
no means of fixing to the sleeve is shown. 2E is keyed to the ratchet sleeve.
Nested bearings
To allow room within the original outer diameter of the drum for the clamp mortise and
for the fixing lugs that secure the paper clamp, the arrangement of nested bearings was
modified. The original design shows the outer drum (4H) bearing on the ratchet sleeve
(2I), and the full length of the ratchet sleeve is shown bearing on the swinging arm
sleeves which are pinned to the shaft (7D) and meet in the middle (A/165, Fig. 7 , Fig.
5.13). The altered arrangement is shown in 337 K 24. Since there is no real need for the
swinging arm sleeves to sheath the full length of the shaft, these two half-sleeves were
dispensed with and reduced to a boss at each end, integral with the side arms, and
pinned to the shaft. The ratchet sleeve is supported by bearing surfaces at each end
only. At the ratchet end the boss is extended through the swinging arm to provide one
bearing surface; at the gear end the boss does not extend into the barrel chamber.
Instead the second bearing is provided by a phosphor bronze bush (to avoid steel-tosteel bearing surface) in a press fit. Eliminating the two full half-sleeves allows the
diameter of the bearing boss at the ratchet end to be reduced from 1¾" to 1⅜". The
extra internal space gained by eliminating the sleeves allows the cross clamp securing
lugs and a keyway for the gear to be accommodated within the original outer dimensions
of the drum assembly.
Capacity of print-roll stock - Explanation
The unloaded diameter of the feed and take-up drums is shown as 3" (A/165, Fig. 7 ).
The two views (A/165 and A/172) showing the routing of the paper between the drum
also show the diameters as 3" with no indication of the effect on the diameters of paper
stock. The A/173 plan view shows what appears to be a single thickness of paper
stretched between the roller and the take-up spool. This suggests that the printout is

88

5 Printing

intended for short print runs only (checking and testing) and that the printer roll would
therefore be replenished each time a stereotyping tray is changed. If only a few turns of
paper are loaded each time then the effects of the gradual change in the effective
diameters, as a result of the reserve stock transferring from the feed roll to the take-up
drum, can be ignored.
The housing for the clock-spring (A/165, Fig. 7 ) is relatively small (the height of the
channel is about 0.5") and the modest number of turns of the take-up drum available to
pre-tension the spring would seem to limit the length of paper the drum can hold. A
further concern is that the tension of the clock-spring may override the backstop pawl
and cause unwanted feeds or, in the worst case, runaway. The feed pawl is lifted clear of
the ratchet teeth during the upstroke and for most of the return stroke so provides no
resistance to runaway or unwanted feeds for most of the print stroke, and the backstop
pawl (3I, A/165 Fig. 6 ) offers the only resistance to unwanted paper feed during this part
of the cycle.
The paper management system revealed a subtlety in the design that was not at first
obvious. The maximum paper stock possible is physically limited by the gap between the
feed drum and take-up drum. This gap is about 0.58" (A/165, Fig. 7 ). With paper
thickness of 0.004" the number of turns is approximately 145 and the approximate
length of the reserve paper roll is at least 113 feet (assuming a constant nominal barrel
diameter of 3" and zero stacking factor). This upper limit is unnecessarily long and can be
reduced by a factor of four with the added advantage of making loading the paper stock
(rolled on manually) more manageable. A radial thickness of 1/8" of paper provides an
unbroken run of about twenty-four feet which is a practical length and will serve for an
indicative design calculation.
A twenty-four-foot run of paper corresponds to a nominal thirty-one turns on the feed
drum. The size of the annular channel for the clock-spring is seemingly too small to
house a spring of sufficient length to maintain tension. However, the operation of the
mechanism shows that the total number of turns of the take-up drum to transfer all the
paper stock from the feed roll is only a small fraction of the number of turns of paper on
the roll at the start.
When the feed pawl engages towards the end of the return stroke the feed drum rotates
clockwise against the stationary take-up gear to issue a short length of paper (Fig. 5.3).
The downward arc of the printing roller during the return stroke wraps this short length
of paper around the take-up drum. The essential action transferring paper from the feed

89

5 Printing

drum to the take-up drum is this wrapping motion that takes place towards the end of
the return stroke and the take-up drum does not need to turn anything like the number
of turns of paper on the feed drum to completely transfer the paper stock from one
drum to the other.
At the start of the run, the diameter of the feed roll will be greater than that of the takeup drum. When the distribution of the paper stock is equal, the diameters will be equal;
at the end of the run the diameter of the take-up drum will be greater. If the take-up
drum was not free to move then the incremental length of paper issued for each result
will be slightly longer at the start of the run than that wrapped around the take-up drum
– this because the diameter of the paper stock on the feed drum is larger than that of the
take-up drum. Similarly, if the take-up drum was not free to move, then the incremental
length of paper issued at the end of a run will be slightly shorter than that wrapped
around the take-up drum. The take-up drum therefore only takes up the small
differences that result from the incrementally changing diameters as the paper stock
transfers between drums. At the start of the cycle, the compensatory motion from the
clock-spring will be clockwise; when the paper stock is equally distributed between the
drums there will be no compensatory motion; at the end of the paper supply, the
compensatory take-up motion will be anticlockwise.
The worst-case difference occurs at the start and end of the paper supply when the
distribution is most unequal. For the purpose of estimating the number of turns required
of the take-up spool, assume that this worst-case situation persisted throughout the
paper transfer. The difference between the length of paper issued and wrapped for a
paper stock 1/8" thick in one turn of the feed drum will be π x (difference in diameters) =

π ÷ 4 = 0.785" per turn. Since the direction of compensation reverses at the half way
point of the stock transfer, the number of take-up turns required is half the total number
of turns i.e. 31 ÷ 2, say fifteen turns. The worst-case length discrepancy over the whole
24-foot roll will be 15 x 0.785" = 12" (say). The number of compensatory turns by the
take-up spool in either direction will therefore be 12" ÷ (π x 3") = 1.27 turns. This is well
within the capacity of the clock-spring. This estimate assumes worst case diameter
difference of 1/4" for the whole transfer. The reality is more favourable than this.
The upshot of this analysis is that the clock-spring is not the limiting factor in the take-up
capacity of the mechanism. Due to the wrapping action of the downstroke, the
relationship between feed turns and take-up turns is not one-to-one as first appeared.
For a 1/8" thickness of paper stock a single paper feed with a fresh roll is πD/54 = 0.189"

90

5 Printing

where fifty-four is the number of ratchet teeth. The worst-case difference in line-height
in the printed result (the difference in line height between the start and end of the
twenty-four-foot roll) due to the shrinking diameter of the feed drum as the paper stock
depletes is (2π ÷ 54) x (thickness of paper stock) = 0.0145". Given that the ratchet
advances one tooth per cycle this corresponds to about 8% of the nominal feed for a
single line i.e. the difference between line-heights at the start of the print roll and at the
end as a result of diameter changes as the paper stock transfers to the take-up drum is
8% in the worst case.

5.4 Locks and Modifications to Printing Racks Lock
The locking technique most widely used in the Engine is the insertion of wedge-shapes to
lock, make fine adjustments to centralise a rack or gear wheel, or to detect positionally
indeterminate motion (see 3.1 Locks and Security Devices, p. 29). What was not clear
until last was whether wedge locks are also a refined part of the drive mechanism and
intended to operate against load i.e. whether their function was confined to ensuring the
integrity of digital operation, as in the calculating section, or whether, in the output
apparatus, the locks are intended to align the printing and punch wheels to analog
standards of exactness sufficient for a typographically acceptable result comparable to
hand-typesetting.
Early experiments with the output apparatus showed imperfect alignment of the inked
results on the print roll and it was clear that the forces exerted by the locks were not
sufficient to drive the stereotyping punch wheels or the printing wheels into alignment,
whether or not this was their intended function, and this had been masked by the
enduring stiffness in the drive train. The locks were sufficient to hold rack and wheel
positions to prevent derangement but not sufficient to effect final registration.
The solution adopted was to modify the drive to one of the locks so that it operates with
controlled force of insertion sufficient to align the printing/stereotyping mechanism.
Locks are provided at five separate points in the output apparatus. These operate on:
1. Compound racks meshing with the sectors (5L , A/174, A/176)
2. Printing-wheel racks (7Z, A/172)
3. Printing-wheels (n9R A/172, A/173)
4. Stereotyping punch wheels (large) (1I3, A/172)

91

5 Printing
5. Stereotyping punch wheels (I3, A/172)
In all five instances locking is by means of a single common wedge-shaped locking bar
engaging with an aligned set of V-shaped notches.
At least one lock is needed to force the final alignment and whichever of them is chosen
requires modification to apply greater insertion force. The vertical lock on the compound
racks at the sector-wheel end is too early in the train: spindle whip, wind-up, and play in
the spindle and rack teeth would tend to degrade the settings.
The arms of the printing wheels lock and printing racks lock are relatively slim and were
clearly not intended as a drive to operate under significant load in the form as drawn.
There is also no obvious way to strengthen the printing-wheels lock. Since the inked
copy is anyway primarily for checking, exact alignment on the print-roll is less critical than
for the stereotyping punch wheels. However, the stereotyping punch wheels are driven
from the printing wheels via horizontal racks (n6 R, A/172) and misalignments in the
printing wheels will be transferred. Misalignments persisted after the frictional drag of
the printing racks was remedied. If the locks were intended to perform alignment of the
print heads to analog standards of exactness then the forces with which they were driven
home were inadequate. Experimental stereotyping in Plaster of Paris confirmed this.
Either the design did not provide for sufficiently strong forces on the locks, or the design
relied inappropriately on the precision of the drive train to align the heads. In either
event the problem of alignment needed solution.
The ideal lock to strengthen would be the crab-claw locks operating on the stereotyping
punch wheels as it is the quality of the stereotypes that is the ultimate purpose of the
whole apparatus. A crab-claw lock is shown in Fig. 5.17 (A/172 bottom left) for the small
punch wheels (left) (the one for the larger punch wheels (right) is not drawn). The claws
close simultaneously but only one or the other of the bars engage with the V-notches
between the type heads depending on the position of the type wheel. In the position
shown in A/172 (Fig. 5.17) the right-hand claw will be active in engaging with the Vnotches between the type punches the next time the punch wheels lower. The left-hand
locking bar does not engage with the sector gear teeth.

Y ). The angled shoulders

The lock is operated by raising the twin-tyned locking slider (2

of the slider drive the two upper curved followers outwards to close bars (I3 , 1I3) in a
rocking action. Lowering the slider operates the lower two curved followers (I21 , 1I21) to

92

5 Printing

Y , A/172, A/173)

release the lock. The locking slider rides on a single dovetail slide (2

and is driven by forked lever 3X pinned to live rocker shaft 3G. The rocker shaft is driven
by conjugate cam pair 2A11, 2A12 (A/173) and contact followers 3W1 and 3W2 (A/172,
A/173).

Fig. 5.17: Crab-claw lock for stereotyping punch wheels (A/172, colour added).

The claw-lock is not redrawn for the large stereotyping punch wheels (A/172 right)
though it is clear from the provision of the dovetail slide, cams and followers that the
method of locking the large stereotyping wheels is a repeat of their smaller counterparts.
The cams in this case are 2A13 and 2A14 and the followers, 1W1 , 1W2 (A/173).
However, there is no obvious way of increasing the operating force of the crab-claw locks
to force better alignment of the punch wheels (see 4. Output Apparatus, Implications of
Rack Offset, p. 61 for related discussion).
By elimination, the lock selected for strengthening was the printing-racks lock (5T 2 ,
A/172 centre). There is space in the original design for an additional mechanism without

93

5 Printing

modifying the layout of the shafts and axes, and a way was found of deriving the driving
forces needed from existing mechanism.
Modified Printing Rack Lock

Rocker shaft (for

Adjusting
screws

small punches)

Locking bar
Collapsible
link
Locking-bar
arms

Rocker
shaft
Fig. 5.18: Modified printing racks lock drive.

In the original arrangement a T-bar cam (2A6) is shown at 6-o’clock in A/175 left. The
follower arm and locking bar (5T 2) are shown in elevation in A/172, A/175, and in plan
on A/173 (the locking bar is obscured in the plan view and is shown in dotted outline.)

The T-bar acts on the contact follower (5S) to drive the lock into engagement. The lock
disengages by dropping out after the T-bar cam has passed, or being kicked out when the
rack next moves.
In the modified scheme (Fig. 5.18) the wedge-shaped locking bar and side-arms (5T 2 )
are retained and a collapsible-link drive was added to provide positive controlled force to
drive the locking bar home. The additional (sturdier) mechanism appears on the left of
the vertical centre-line in Fig. 5.18. The wedged locking bar, locking-bar arms, and shaft

94

5 Printing

are retained as originally drawn and the locus of the locking bar is still determined by the
length of the original arms (5T 2 , 5T 1 A/172, A/173). The new mechanism is pivoted on

A ) of the locking-bar arms (Fig. 5.18

two existing fixed centres: the rocker shaft (5

bottom right, A/172 bottom right, A/173), and the rocker shaft (8I ) for the small
stereotyping punch wheels (Fig. 5.18 top left, A/172 near top left, A/173). Both fixed
centres are part of the original design. The two additional pivots for the collapsible links
have moving centres.
In the original design the cam follower (5S) drives the locking-bar arms via shaft 5

A to

which the arms are fixed (A/172). In the modified scheme the locking-bar arms are free
to rotate on the shaft and the locking-bar is instead driven by the collapsible link
mechanism. The lower horizontal drive links (Fig. 5.18) are fixed to the shaft (the second
lower horizontal drive link is obscured in shadow in Fig. 5.18). The lock engages when

A ) turns clockwise driven by cam follower 5S. The lowermost link of

the rocker shaft (5

the collapsible link assembly (horizontal in Fig. 5.18), which is fixed to the shaft, is driven
clockwise and this drives the connecting link upwards, driving the collapsed link into its
straightened position. The mechanical advantage is substantial and the locking bar is
firmly driven home against frictional resistance in the racks and rack drive train. The lock
engagement is sustained by the pressure of the T-bar cam (A/175) acting on the follower
5

S. Pressure is released when the T-bar cam has passed and the lock disengages by

dropping out. The links collapse and the mechanism reverts to the fallback state. The
cams and timing remain unaltered.
The locking bar is sheathed in a loose sleeve slotted
into the drive links (Fig. 5.18). Adjusting screws were
fitted in the back of the sleeve that holds the locking
bar. These allow micro-adjustment of the insertion
depth into the V-notches of the racks to ensure that
the apex of the wedge is pressed fully home when
the lock is active, and also to align the locking bar for
even pressure in the V-grooves along the run of
printing racks.
Additional field
modifications
were made to
the mechanism
in Fig. 5.18.
Increasing the

Fig. 5.19: Splint (detail).

95

Fig. 5.20: Splinted locking bar arms.

5 Printing

insertion depth using the adjusting screws in the sleeve drove the locking bar past the
limits of the retaining pillars and deformed them. The top fixing points of the retaining
pillars were removed to allow the pillars to spring forwards and the locking bar is
sandwiched between the sprung pillars and the adjusting screws. A final modification
was to splint the locking bar arms (Figs. 5.19, 5.20) to allow adjustment of the effective
extension of the arms again for accurate alignment. Adjustment is made using screws
and slotted holes in the splint which wraps around the back of the arms (Fig. 5.19).

5.5 Cams, Drive and Control
The operation of the inking, printing and stereotyping mechanisms is co-ordinated and
controlled by a set of fourteen vertical cams located inside the printing apparatus frame
(A/173). The cam cluster consists of fourteen cams of which ten are conjugate pairs i.e.
two cams that are geometric inversions of each other – where there is a rise on one,
there is a corresponding fall on the other so that the cam followers provide positive drive
in both directions.

Cam 2A14

Cam 2A13

Fig. 5.21: Output apparatus cams (part).

96

5 Printing

The set of cams is shown in plan in A/173; partial elevations and cam profiles are given in
A/172 and A/175. The cam shaft (2D A/172, A/173) is driven by gear wheel, 2A1 (A/173)
from the main drive shaft, 4

C (A/163) via an idler (6D, A/163). The fourteen cams are

annotated 2A2 through 2A16 (A/173) (2A15 is not part of the cam sequence).
The cams and the mechanisms they control are as follows:

Cam
(A/173)
2

A2 2A3

2

Output Apparatus Cams
Mechanism Controlled
Compound-racks lock (A/172, A/174, A/175)

2

A4

Printing stroke drive (A/172, A/175)

2

A5

Printing-wheels lock (A/175)

2

A6

Vertical (Printing)-racks lock (A/175)

A7 2A8

Stereotyping punch wheels (small) (A/172, A/173)

A9 2A10

Stereotyping punch wheels (large) (A/172, A/173)

A11, 2A12

Stereotyping punch wheels lock (small) (A/172, A/173)

2

Stereotyping punch wheels lock (large) (A/172, A/173)

2
2

A13 2A14
2

A16

Inking roller (A/172, A/173 bottom)

Compound-racks Lock
The operation of the compound-racks lock is described above (see Locking the
Compound Racks, p.57).
Printing Stroke Drive
The linkage driving the printing assembly is shown in elevation in A/172. The single
heart-shaped cam, 2A4, shown in elevation A/175, and in plan as part of the cam stack
towards the top of A/173 (but omitted in A/172). The roller follower (H1 A/172) pivots
on rocker shaft 4B and drives fixed-angle link H2. The cam pushes the roller out to the
right during the lifting stroke. The return stroke is not actively driven but the printing
mechanism is prevented from being stranded past top dead centre by the action of the
spherical counterweight, 7C 2 (bottom right A/172). The counterweight initiates the

97

5 Printing

return stroke which is controlled by the pressure of the follower on the retreating profile
of the cam.
Printing-wheels Lock
The printing-wheel lock cam (2A5) is the single T-bar cam shown at about 3-o’clock on
A/175 right with the follower arm and wedge-shaped locking bar top right of the same
view. The follower (8P) and locking bar (8Q2) are duplicated in A/172 but without the Tbar cam.
The T-bar strikes the follower arm and drives the live rocker shaft 8L (A/172, A/173) to
which it is pinned. The locking bar assembly, 8Q2, also keyed to the rocker shaft, is
driven so as to drive the locking bar into the run of notches to immobilise the print
wheels. The drive is unidirectional i.e. the locking action stops once the T-bar has passed.
No provision is made for the locking bar to clear the V-notches after the locking window
is over. The locking bar rests under its own weight on the printing wheels when not
actively locking and is bounced about by the V-notches as the printing wheels rotate.
Printing-racks Lock
The locking bars (5

T 2 , 5T 1 A/172, A/173) for the vertical printing racks (7Z ) and for

R ) are operated by pivoted levers directly driven by cam followers.

print wheels (n9

The drive, operation and modification of the printing racks lock is described in 5.4 Locks
and Modifications to Printing Racks Lock, p. 91.
Stereotyping Punch Wheels
The small stereotyping punch wheels (n 4B, A/172) are raised and lowered by conjugate
cam pair 2A7, 2A8 (A/173) via cam followers 8D1, 8D2 shown in elevation in A/172.
Bosses for the two forked end levers (8D3) are pinned to the live rocker shaft (8I ). The
forked-end lever raises and lower the stereotyping wheel assembly which runs in fixed
dovetail slides made up of moving slider 5V set in framing slides 1L7 and 7V.
The arrangement is duplicated for raising and lowering the large stereotyping punch
wheels. The conjugate cam pair in this case is 2A9 and 2A10. Cam profiles are shown in
A/175 (left) and cam followers are shown in A/175 and A/172. The forked end lever (3B3)
drives the assembly in dovetail guides as for the small stereotyping wheels.

98

5 Printing

Stereotyping Punch-wheels Lock
The twin-tyned locking slider (A/172, Fig. 5.17) rides on a single dovetail slide (2y , A/172,
A/173) and is driven by forked lever 3X pinned to live rocker shaft 3G. The rocker shaft is
driven by conjugate cam pair 2A11, 2A12 (A/173) and contact followers 3W1 and 3W2
(A/172, A/173).
The operation of the claw-lock is described in more detail in 5.4 Locks and Modifications
to Printing Racks Lock, p. 91.
The claw-lock for the small punch wheels is not redrawn for the large punch wheels
though it is clear from the provision of the dovetail slider, cams and followers that the
method of locking the large punch wheels is a repeat of their smaller counterparts. The
cams in this case are 2A13 and 2A14 and the followers 3B1 , 3B2.
Inking Roller
The inking roller cam (2A16), follower (4 U 2 ), drive links (4 U 3 , P ) are shown in plan in
A/173 bottom centre and in elevation in A/172. The cam arm sweeps against the scytheshaped contact follower which rocks on the fixed pivot (K ) working against the action of
the compression spring, 1F (A/172). A long link (P ) operates link 1K3 , which pivots on
fixed shaft 1K to drive the two swinging arms, 1K2 and 1K1. The travel of the inking roller
towards the print heads is gradual while the restoration to home position is a snap action
as the follower leaves the cam and the compression spring is released. The spring has
two functions: it provides contact pressure between the inking roller and the sliding
roller while in the home position, and it restores the inking roller after the downward
sweep to the type heads.

99

6 Stereotyping

6.

Stereotyping

The output apparatus produces printed inked results on a paper roll as described in Chapter 5, as
well as automatically stereotyping results i.e. impressing results into suitable material contained
in two trays. The stereotypes were intended to be used as moulds for making printing plates for
use in conventional printing presses of the time (Figs. 2.5, 2.7, 4.1).
This section describes the design, operation and control of the travelling platform that
automatically repositions the two trays to receive results from punch wheels when, set with each
new result, they lower to make impressions on soft material in the trays below.

Cams
Matrix
pan
Auxiliary
crank
Travelling
platform

Stereotyping
table

Fig. 6.1: Output Apparatus, Elevation.

100

6 Stereotyping

The printing and stereotyping apparatus is shown in A/163 left (Figs. 2.2, 2.3, 2.5, 6.1). The
printing apparatus is the box-like assembly (Fig. 2.3) bolted to the left-hand vertical frame
members roughly half way up the engine and includes a local set of cams that drive and
orchestrate the motions required for both printing and stereotyping. The stereotyping table is
the apparatus immediately below with the signature wish-bone struts that are part of the cast
legs (1A, A/163, Fig. 6.1). The stereotyping apparatus is wider front to back than the calculating
section (A/164, Fig. 2.2 Plan) and the cast stand for the stereotyping table rests on the base
plinth not on the narrower rails on which the rest of the Engine rests i.e. the cast legs of the
stereotyping table fall outside the main base rails (Fig. 2.5).
The transfer of thirty-digit results from the results column in the calculating section, to the print
wheels for hardcopy printing, and to the punch wheels for stereotyping, is illustrated in Fig. 4.2
and described in sections 4. Output Apparatus and 5. Printing.
The thirty-digit result of each calculating cycle is set up at the same time on both the small and
large punches each of which have thirty type wheels. The punch wheels are shown in A/172 and
in outline at the top of A/147. The two sets of punch wheels are lowered together to impress
the result into the material in the trays below to provide two sizes of impression, large and small,
in the same action. There is missing detail in the original design drawings and it is unclear
whether the large and small pans were intended to receive impressions at the same time or
whether one of the two formats excluded the other (see Split Carriage, p. 106).
The horizontal racks transfer results from the print wheels to both the sets of small and large
stereotyping punch wheels (Fig. 4.2). The racks (n6R) shown in End View A/172 and as curved
‘push rods’ (n7R) in Plan View A/173, narrow from 1/8th-inch pitch for the large punch wheels
down to 1/16th- inch pitch for the small wheels (Fig. 6.2). The overall structure of the rack
assembly is that of a rectangular frame made up of cast framing members bolted together. The
frame is formed at the narrow end (A/173 left) by framing piece 2N1, at the broad end by 3N2
(A/173 right) and by long side pieces, M1 and M2 (A/173 top and bottom respectively). The
racks are boxed in at the full width end by the main side piece framing members (M1, M2). At
the narrow end the straight sections are sandwiched between two edge blocks. The curved
sections of the racks are formed in the shapes shown and retain their curvature when relaxed.
They do not rely on lateral contact to retain their form and the curvature is not a sprung form
resulting from lengthwise compression. Rather, the shapes are machined forms that are retained
with the racks in a dismantled state (337 K 391 A-D).

101

6 Stereotyping

Fig. 6.2: Horizontal racks in mounting frame.

The stereotyping sectors (punch wheels, Fig. 4.3) have vertical and rotational degrees of freedom
only and have no freedom to move in the horizontal plane. The position of the result on the page
is determined not by lateral motion of the heads but by the position of the tray below the heads.
The stereotyping apparatus is in effect a programmable X–Y platform that repositions the trays
under the stereotyping heads anew for each calculating cycle to receive each new result.
The format of the tabulated results in the stereotyping trays is programmable. The apparatus
provides options for line-to-line results (down the page) with automatic column wrap to the top
of the next column, column-to-column results (across the page) with automatic line-wrap at the
end of each line, and options for results to appear in single or multiple columns. The number of
lines per page, and leaving blank lines between groups of lines for ease of reading, are alterable,
as are the page margin-widths and spacing between columns.
The various layout options are selected by choosing pattern wheels preloaded onto the
apparatus (Fig. 2.5). The pattern wheels (3N, 6N) are shown in A/163 (elevation), A/164
extreme left (plan), and in A/166. One pattern wheel (3N), selected from a possible choice of
four, determines line-to-line spacing (right-hand set-in Fig. 2.5); a second pattern wheel (6N)
(left-hand set in Fig. 2.5), also selected from a possible set of four, controls column-to-column

102

6 Stereotyping

movement. Selection is made by means of a sliding pawl the position of which determines which
of the pre-mounted set of pattern wheels is active (see p. 117).
The formatting features are not independently variable. The pitch and arrangement of teeth on a
single line-to-line pattern wheel, for example, determines a fixed and unalterable combination of
line features: line-height, how many results (if any) are grouped before a blank line is left, the
height of the blank line, how many lines per page, top and bottom page margins. The apparatus
has capacity for up to four pre-loaded pattern wheels each of which offers a fixed combination of
formatting features. Pattern wheels for different formats can be mounted as required by
demounting one or more of those already mounted. A similar set of four fixed combinations of
column-to-column features are provided as standard: how many columns per page, page
margins, and margins between columns. Any of four of the line-to-line pattern wheels can be
selected with any of the column-to-column pattern wheels i.e. the line-to-line pre-set
combination options are independent of the column-to-column options. (For page formatting
and layout options see 337 X 23).
The stereotyping mechanism forms part of the control mechanism of the calculating sequence.
When a page is completed in the format pre-set by the pattern wheels, a cylindrical weight is
released into a trough (B A/163 bottom left). The trough operates the trip lever connected, via a
cable (l ) guided by pulleys, to the main-drive clutch above the cam stack at the far right of the
engine (A/163). When the end-of-page condition trips the lever the clutch at the main cam stack
disengages the drive and the handle runs free. Uncoupling of the drive at end of page halts the
engine without any overrun and ensures the integrity of the figure wheel settings and control
mechanism when the calculation is resumed so that the run of results is continuous. Automatic
halting at the end of a page allows the material in the trays to be renewed. This is done by fixing
fresh trays, prepared with suitable material, on the movable carriage.
Main Drawings: A/147, A/163, A/164, A/166, A/172, 337 X 23)

6.1 Travelling Platform
The material receiving the impressions from the stereotyping punch wheels is held in
shallow trays called, in the original drawings, ‘matrix pans’ (1I, A/147 top, Fig. 6.1) and
separate matrix pans for large and small type are shown. The matrix pans rest in a travelling
frame or carriage 1H (A/147 top). The soft material, wet Plaster of Paris, for example, needs
to set before being removed from the pan or before being used as a mould while still in the

103

6 Stereotyping

pan. The pans therefore need to be removable
to allow replacements, pre-loaded with soft
material of the correct consistency and depth,
to be mounted on the travelling frame so that
tabulation can proceed without waiting for the
material to set before a tray can be freed up.
No means of fixing the pans to the carriage is
shown, nor how their separation on the
carriage is retained. The Elevation (A/147 top
left) shows a flush fit between the pan and the

Large matrix pan

Screw
clamps

carriage frame along the left and right edges,
and the End View shows the same clearance to
the punch wheels for both small and large pans

Travelling platform

i.e. the two pans are shown to be in the same
horizontal plane. The position of the pans on
the carriage appears to rely on a tight fit left-

Fig. 6.3: Matrix pan and travelling
platform.

to-right in the width of the frame, with the pans wedged in place along their length i.e.
wedged front-to-rear as viewed from the front of the Engine. Registration by wedging
would be consistent with contemporary printing practice though the drawings are not
explicit in this respect.
The carriage bearing the pans runs on two pairs of inverted V-shaped runners. One pair (2G,
1

H, A/147 Elevation) gives the freedom to traverse line-to-line down the page in any given
column; the other pair (F, 2G, A/147 End View) at right angles to the first, gives column-tocolumn travel across the page on any given line i.e. the orthogonal sets of sliders provide
the two degrees of freedom required for independent X–Y motion.
Line-to-line motion of the pans corresponds to right-to-left motion of the carriage in the End
View (147 top right) (the punch wheels are shown poised above the top-of-page position for
both trays, A/147 End View). Facing the engine this corresponds to a front-to-back motion
i.e. the pan retreats as the table progresses down the page. The column-to-column motion
corresponds to right-to-left motion of the carriage in the Elevation (A/147 top left) i.e. the
carriage traverses right to left when progressing from the first column to the next column
along.
The carriage supporting the two matrix pans is shown driven in two separate ways. For

104

6 Stereotyping

stereotyping with large type the carriage is driven by a pair of racks and gears shown in the
three views in A/147.
The Plan View in A/147 shows the two gears (5S,
5

P engaging with two racks 1R2 and 1R1

respectively which would be fixed to the
underside of the carriage (Fig. 6.5). Rotation of
the shaft (7A) advances the platform line-to-line.
When stereotyping with small type, the carriage is
driven by a single pinion 5R which engages with
rack 4R. The reduced pitch of the pinion ensures
smaller line separation for the small type. No

V-grooves
Travelling
frame
Fig. 6.4: Small pan frame and rack
(inverted)
Rack

means of fixing the single central rack to the underside of the carriage is shown in either
A/147 or A/163.
The pinions (5S, 5P) for the double rack, and the pinion (5R) for the single rack (4R) are
driven by the same drive shaft, 7A. Since the carriage for both matrix pans is shown as a
single assembly the drives as shown would be mutually exclusive: if both were engaged
there would be a contention between the different pitches of the single pinion drive and the
double pinion drive. It would seem then that stereotyping in both small and large type
simultaneously was not intended, and only one type size used at a time with the drive for
the unused size disengaged. Again, there is no indication of how one of the drives is to be
disabled.
The pan for the smaller type is shorter than the large pan by roughly the same factor as the
difference in pitch between the pinion teeth and the pitch of the gear teeth. This suggests
that having smaller type was not to produce more lines per page but to provide an
alternative page size for the same run of results. The smaller type does, however, provide
the option of up to three-column layouts compared to a maximum of two columns in the
larger type.
The pinion, 5R, is shown centred between the side frame members though the detail of
what is fixed to what is unclear (see below). A travelling keyway is shown along the length
of the shaft 7A (A/147 Plan) which allows the whole assembly to traverse during column-tocolumn motion (top-to-bottom motion in A/147 Plan). The column-to-column traverse is
best seen in A/163 left and A/147 Elevation). (The pinion is shown wider in A/163 than in
the two views in A/147. This is a drafting inconsistency).

105

6 Stereotyping

Split Carriage
In the reading above the three views in A/147 show a single platform bearing the two matrix
pans, mounted on inverted V-shaped runners. The carriage bearing the two pans tracks on
the long runners to provide line-to-line motion (front-to-back motion facing the engine;
right-to-left motion in A/147, End View); the long runners track on transverse runners to
enable column-to-column movement (left-to-right facing the engine in A/147, Elevation).
The larger line-pitch required for the larger typeface is provided by the pair of racks 1R2 and

R1 engaging with pinions 5S, 5P respectively; the reduced line pitch for the smaller
typeface is provided by the single central rack 4R and pinion 5R (working point 5a).
1

A central issue is that the single travelling platform bearing the two matrix pans has two
line-to-line drives that have different feed rates and the drives will be in damaging
contention if they operate at the same time.
A clue to the original design intention may be to resolve the issue of how the two sets of
pinions were to be driven as there may be provision for disabling one of the drives so that
only one of the two matrix pans operated at a time. A/147 Plan shows an uninterrupted
sleeve 5B on the drive shaft 7A. The sleeve appears to be keyed to the shaft by a sliding key
along the full length of the shaft (dotted lines in A/147 Plan) – this to provide line-to-line
drive independent of the column-to-column traverse. The End View shows a key (e) cut into
the shaft. It is unclear (depending on where the section is considered to be taken) whether
the pinions 5S, 5P , or the sleeve, are keyed to the shaft. If the pinions are keyed to the
shaft then the sleeve can act as a spacer separating the pinions which are sandwiched by
collars against the sleeve; if the sleeve is keyed to the shaft then the pinions are integral
with the sleeve, and what would otherwise be outer collars become bosses which space the
pinions from the frame.
An additional more minor omission is that no means is shown of fixing or securing the single
small rack (4R) to the carriage. It is drawn levitating freely in A/147 End View.
From the analysis of the drive trains as drawn there is no evidence of provision for disabling
one of the drive mechanisms to avoid contention between the two drives. Access to the
underside of the carriage to disengage either of the drives is anyway restricted and it is
difficult to see how a convenient means of disengaging the drives by disconnection would
be devised. A further point against disconnection is that it is essential that the racks are
replaced in exactly the same mesh so as to ensure correct positioning under the

106

6 Stereotyping

stereotyping heads as the pinions are phase-locked to the pattern wheels. If the racks are
incorrectly remeshed, the punch wheels risk fouling the walls of the pans and results would
anyway be displaced on the page. Refitting the racks exactly is an operational constraint.
The flanges on either side of the central pinion 5R may be intended to act as guides if the
rack is to be uncoupled and refitted – a marginal point.
If the pans are secured in the positions as in A/147 End View then, when stereotyping with
the large pan, the small punch wheels will foul the trailing wall of the small pan (at the endof-page) as the carriage advances down the page. Initially this supported the idea that
simultaneous stereotyping using both large and small types was not intended but the
conclusion is based on the premise that the two pans are fixed to the carriage.
The Mechanical Notation was used to in an attempt to clarify the carriage drive. The sleeve
5

B has the same index of identity (=5) as the pinion 5R which indicates that they are parts
of the same piece and act as one. The Notation shows that the central pinion 5R, as well as
both pinions 5S, 5P are driven by 5B which the notation shows as loose on shaft 7A.
The conclusion is that 5B is integral with all three pinions, 5R, 5S, and 5P, and that 5B is
driven rotationally by shaft 7A to which it is keyed, to produce linear motion of the carriage,
and that 5B, 5R , 5S, and 5P make up a single assembly free to move axially along shaft 7A
sliding on the key for column-to-column motion.
A resolution to the difficulty (contention of the two drives) is suggested by the Notations
which indicate that the small pan might be free to slide within the frame of the moving
carriage and that the two drives can therefore operate without conflict at the same time.
The small pan is identified in A/147 Plan and End View as 7K. In the notational convention
devised by Babbage underscoring a part-identifying character by a single line denotes
‘Linear Motion in Plan’.1 7K and the rack that drives it, 4R, are underscored three times in
A/147 Plan while the large-pan identifier, 1I, and drive racks, 1R2 and 1R1 , are underscored
twice. This would indicate that the small rack has an additional degree of linear freedom in
the horizontal plane i.e. that the small pan is driven by the central rack and pinion and
moves relative to the large pan which itself is moving. The small pan would thus have three
degrees of horizontal freedom, and the large pan, two. An additional supportive indicator is
found in A/178/4 (bottom right), the Trains notation for the frames, which shows the small

1

Bromley, Allan G, ed. Babbage's Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers by Henry Prevost
Babbage. Vol. 2. Los Angeles: Tomash, 1982. ‘Alphabet of Motion’ symbol table, June 1851, pp. 2501.

107

6 Stereotyping

pan driven by both the carriage frame as well as the central rack and pinion. (A/178/5 also
shows K with three underscores in the section labelled ‘Advance from Line to Line’ for the
small pan).
The interpretation from the Notation is suggestive rather than conclusive as there are
puzzlements about notational consistency. For example, rack 4R, and the other racks, are
shown with upright characters which goes against the convention of moving part identifiers
being italicised. This could be a generic issue in the Notation as to how a part, moving in
relation to a part to which it is connected and is itself moving, is annotated. More
significantly the small pan is identified as 7K in A/147 End View and Plan i.e. the pan has a
different index of identity to that for the rack and this would ordinarily indicate that the rack
and the pan are not of the same piece. However, in the Notational trains, A/178/5 and
A/178/4, the small pan is consistently identified as 4K which indicates that the rack and small
pan are indeed of a piece. Despite these and other apparent anomalies the clear indication
is that the small pan does, in some portrayals, enjoy three degrees of linear freedom in the
horizontal plane.
The upshot of these considerations was a
decision to split the carriage into two with one

Large pan pinions

travelling platform for the small pan, and one
for the large. Both rack and pinion drives
remain permanently engaged (Fig. 6.5), and
Dashpot

simultaneous stereotyping using both large
and small punch wheels becomes possible.

Small pan pinion

Because of the differing rates of feed of the

Fig. 6.5: Split carriage drive (underside).

two pans the large pan gains on the small pan
as stereotyping progresses. Calculation confirms that the pans do not crash. A/147 End
View shows the distance between the first lines of the small and large pans as 17¼".
Working back from the diameter of the pinions gives the maximum travel of the large pan as
14.75", and 5.9" for the small pan i.e. a feed ratio of 5:2. Retaining the original pan sizes,
pan separation at start, and pinion diameters, the clearance between the pans at the endof-page is 0.1375" (337 L 25) i.e. the large pan stops short of fouling the small pan. Also,
because of the compressed rate of feed of the small pan, the punch wheels do not foul the
trailing lip of the pan.

108

6 Stereotyping

The absence of detail of the fixings of the pans (large and small) could be a simple omission,
or could indicate that no fixings are needed with the large pan being driven line-to-line by
the front lip of the frame, and the small pan by the central rack and pinion (itself carried
with the travelling platform) with the small pan free to slide within the carriage frame.
The general arrangement of the new carriage is shown in General Assembly drawing 337 L
25. Detail of the small pan rack is given in 337 L 352 (called ‘rear’ i.e. away from the front of
the machine), and that of the large pan racks in 337 L 351 A(LH) and L 351 B(RH). As drawn
in A/147 the rear (small) pan is some distance away from the rack that drives it and the gap
needs to be bridged. The rack is fixed to a ski-shaped support ribbed for stiffness (Fig. 6.3)
(General Assembly A 337 L 25) in view of the long overhang. The top surface of the bronze
rack-support slides on the underside of the front carriage which acts as a guide. In the split
carriage arrangement, the front and rear carriages are of equal size i.e. both carriages can
accommodate the large matrix pan. Spacers are used to mount the smaller pan in the
carriage frame.
The sleeve 5B shown as continuous on shaft 7A (A/147 Plan) was split in two. The two
sections locate the central pinion by sandwiching it between them. Bosses were added to
the large pinions and two outer collars are fixed to the shaft between the pinions and the
side members of the frame (Fig. 6.5). The full-length key was replaced instead by three
short sections of key, one for each pinion, trapped between the two spacers in the case of
the central pinion, and between the spacers and the outer collars in the case of the pinion
pair. The sleeve is not keyed to the shaft. The use of short sections of key is intended to
reduce axial drag as the carriage traverses column-to-column.
Column-to-column drive for the whole carriage (right to left in A/147 Elevation and A/163) is
less problematic. The carriage is driven by rack 2U2 and pinion 1K at the front of the
apparatus, and rack 2U1 and pinion 1N at the rear. The racks and pinions operate in
tandem with both pinions driven by the same shaft, 1K (Fig. 6.6).

109

6 Stereotyping

Fig. 6.6: Column-to-column rack and pinion, Elevation.

6.2 Drive and Control
The control mechanism for the stereotyping table is shown in the three views in A/166. The
mechanism is driven by the action of two horizontal bars,

E and 9F , also called oscillating

bars (A/166 End View (Fig. 6.8), Figs. 6.7, 6.9) and A/166 Plan (Fig. 6.12). The oscillating bars
and the cluster of levers and trips shown between the two pattern wheels (A/166 End View)
orchestrate the behaviours of the travelling platform for the various page formats including
end-of-page, end-of-line, and end-of-column actions, automatic rewind of the hanging
weights, and the normal progressions of the platform during tabulation.

Fig. 6.7: Oscillating bars (oblique).

Upper oscillating
bar

110

Lower oscillating
bar

6 Stereotyping

Upper oscillating bar

Lower oscillating bar

Line
rocker
lever

Pawl
release
lever

Line pattern
wheel
Column
pattern
wheel

Falling
weight
Conjugate cam pair

Falling
weight

Fig. 6.8: Travelling platform control, (A/166, End View).

Fig. 6.9: Oscillating bars.

Rewind-clutch
lever

Keeper pin

Line-to-line
release peg

F ) is supported by four guides of a piece with the lower bar and the two
bars can slide in relation to each other. The lower bar, E, executes intermittent linear
The upper bar (9

reciprocating motion i.e. moves to and fro’ (left-right-left in A/166 End View) all the time the

E is driven by lever 5E3 turning on fixed
rocker shaft 5E . The wishbone cam followers 5E1, 5E2 are driven by a pair of conjugate
cams, 4R 2 4R 1 (A/166 Elevation, Fig. 6.17). The cam-followers, and rocker shaft, convert
the rotary motion of the cams into reciprocating motion of the lever 5E3 (A/166 End View).
main engine crank is operated. The lower bar
,

111

6 Stereotyping

E3 is trapped in a recess in the lower oscillating bar. Since the
conjugate cams are driven directly from the main drive shaft, 4C, on the underside of the
The rounded head of lever 5

engine (A/163), the oscillating-bar drive is active all the time the Engine is running and the
bar executes one linear reciprocating oscillation each calculating cycle.
The pattern wheels (3N, 6N) are shown as large discs (red) immediately below the two
oscillating bars (Fig. 6.8). The line-to-line motion and the column-to-column motion of the
travelling platform is determined by the arrangement of teeth on the pattern wheels. One
tooth on the pattern wheel corresponds to one stepped increment of the associated matrix
pan. The right-hand pattern wheel (3N) determines line-to-line motion; the left hand
pattern wheel (6N) determines column-to-column motion. So one tooth on the line-to-line
pattern wheel corresponds to a one line advance. Similarly, one tooth on the column-to-column pattern wheel corresponds to a one-column advance. The pattern wheels are
driven by two falling weights:

A drives the column-to-column pattern wheel, B drives

line-to-line action. The weights are suspended by chords over pulleys 6G and 3G fixed to
the pattern wheel shafts (6H, 3H) (A/166 Plan and Elevation).
The oscillating bars control the release of the pattern wheels to advance tooth by tooth
under the pull of the falling weights. In the case of line-to-line control, in each oscillating

C 2 , by

cycle, a peg (Fig. 6.9 right) on the lower oscillating bar releases the line catch pawl, 6

C 1 when it moves right to left (A/166 End View). This frees the

bearing on release lever 6

pattern wheel to rotate clockwise driven by the falling weight.
The restoring force for the line catch is provided by a leaf spring fixed to
the back plate and bearing on a lug on the line catch shaft (the lug is
shown in A/166 End View in solid outline, and as a dotted square just

B in A/166 Plan bottom right). The motion of the

below notation 6

pattern wheel is transmitted to the carriage drive shaft 7A (A/147) via a
gear train. One gear (3B) is mounted on the pattern wheel shaft 3H
(A/166 Plan View). The second gear is shown in (red) outline only with no
alphabetical identifier, drawn approximately concentric with the rocker

B (A/166 End View). This gear, labelled 7U in the

shaft for lever 1

notation of trains in BAB/A/178/5), drives the travelling platform drive
shaft 7A i.e. is the last element in the train connecting the pattern wheel
to the line-to-line motion of the pans.

112

Fig. 6.10: Leaf
spring.

6 Stereotyping

For line-to-line tabulation,
stereotyping progresses
down the page with
successive releases of the line
pattern wheel. The lower

E

oscillating bar ( ) moves to

Keeper pin

and fro once each cycle and
carries with it the line rocker
lever, 1B (A/166 End View),
the pivot of which is integral
with the lower bar and so
moves with it. The lower bar

Line
rocker lever

Column
rocker lever

Fig. 6.11: Line and column rocker levers.

has a short section widened to accommodate a through-slot (A/166 Plan) and the line rocker

v v

lever passes through the bar to engage a slot in the upper bar (working points 9 , 1 , A/166
End View, Fig. 6.11).
For tabulation down the page, uninterrupted by end-of-column or end-of-page conditions,

E

the outward stroke (right to left in A/166 End View) of the lower oscillating bar ( ) drives
the pad of the line rocker lever (1

B) against the right-hand wall of the through-slot (working

points d, 1d). The rocker lever is trapped at the angle drawn (A/166 Plan) and the lower bar
drives the upper bar, via the rocker lever, to follow the outward stroke (right to left). The
upper and lower bars and rocker assembly move as a whole 13/16" to the left. On the
return stroke the lower bar moves to the right. The line rocker lever is held by the upper bar
and briefly turns anti-clockwise on the moving pivot leaving the upper bar stationary. This
continues until the foot of the line rocker lever meets a fixed end-stop which prevents the
foot travelling further to the right. The obstruction of the foot by the end stop is almost
immediate. (The end-stop is shown as a zigzag series of right angles drawn in outline in faint
blue, A/166 Plan, colour added in Fig, 6.12). With the foot of the line rocker obstructed, the
line rocker lever drives the upper bar to the right and the line rocker returns to the inclined
position shown. The overall effect is that the two bars execute the outward and return
stroke together with the upper bar slightly lagging the lower bar at the start of the return
stroke. The length of the stroke is the same (13/16") for both bars.
Runaway
When the line catch releases the pattern wheel there is a danger of the pattern wheel
running away under the pull of the hanging weight. As drawn (A/166 End View, Fig. 6.8), the

113

6 Stereotyping

pattern wheel would advance one tooth for each release if and only if the catch returns
before a second tooth passes i.e. the correct operation of the drive relies on the machine
being driven at the correct uniform speed to ensure that the catch returns in time to
prevent the passage of more than one tooth. This is an unnecessary constraint and one
difficult to guarantee given that the Engine is manually driven and the speeds inevitably
vary. There is also the risk of runaway if the machine is halted with the line catch

C2, runs the same risk.

withdrawn. The column-to-column catch, 5

C2) and the column-to-column catch

In the Timing Diagram (F/385/1) the line-to-line catch (6

C2) are called ‘Detents’ and this appears as a column heading for Column 24. The function

(5

of the catches is to allow the pattern wheels to advance one tooth, and only one tooth, each
cycle in one direction, and to be overridden, against the action of the leaf springs, in the
other direction when the weights and travelling platform are rewound back to start-of-page.
Their function is therefore somewhere between an escapement and a ratchet. Calling the
catches ‘detents’ might ordinarily imply that they can be overridden in either direction and
this is perhaps misleading. In the form as drawn, the ratchet action is there, but not the
action of an escapement.
Given the lengths gone to elsewhere (locking mechanisms, for example) to secure reliability,
it was not thought prudent to rely on the constancy and continuity of the engine speed for
correct line-to-line operation, and it is unlikely that this was intended. The absence of a
means of ensuring single-increment advance of the pattern wheel was taken as a design
oversight inviting remedy.

Fig. 6.12: Travelling platform control, end-stop (A/166, Plan) (blue colour added).

114

6 Stereotyping

Line-to-Line Runaway Pawl
An additional pawl and leaf spring were fitted to provide escapement action i.e. to restrict
the pattern wheel advance to one tooth increment only for each release of the catch. The
existing line-to-line catch was retained in its original unmodified form and a second line
catch (here called the runaway pawl) fitted to prevent unwanted advance after each release
(Fig. 6.13). The modified arrangement is shown on General Assembly 337 L 24. The pattern
wheel and the two catches act as a ratchet and double pawl. An additional peg in the lower
oscillating bar is provided to operate the runaway pawl catch.
In the wait state (i.e. while the travelling platform is stationary while an impression is being
taken) the runaway pawl is held out of engagement, against the action of its leaf spring, by
its peg in the lower oscillating bar. On the outward stroke (right to left) the runaway pawl is
released into engagement on the action of its leaf spring and both the pawls now bear on
the same pattern wheel
tooth. The continuing

Line catch pawl
fixing screw

outward stroke then releases

C2,
working points v and 6v
the line catch pawl (6

Line catch pawl

A/166 End View) acted on by
its peg to allow the pattern
wheel to advance. During the
pattern wheel advance the

Runaway pawl

runaway pawl acts as a
security backstop. The return
Runaway pawl
fixing screw

stroke (left to right) follows
immediately. This releases
the line catch pawl to engage

Blank pattern
wheel

under the action of its leaf
spring and the continuing
return stroke then takes the

Fig. 6.13: Line-to-line runaway pawl.

runaway pawl out of
engagement. The runaway pawl engages before the line catch pawl is withdrawn (outward
stroke) and disengages after the line catch pawl has re-engaged (return stroke). Both pawls
must act in close, lapped, succession, on the same pattern wheel tooth for each release, to
ensure that the backstop action is effective for the smallest tooth pitch.

115

6 Stereotyping

The guides for the oscillating bars require modification to accommodate the additional peg.
The lower bar is shown supported at each end by channels in the two end supports (Fig. 6.9,

E

A/166 End View), and the upper bar supported by four sets of guides ( ) attached to the
lower bar (A/166 Plan). To allow space for the extra peg in the lower bar, the outer two sets
of guides are combined with the end supports to provide support for the upper and lower
bars (337 L 471, L 472); the central two remaining guides remain unchanged.
Column-to-column Runaway Pawl
The modification of the column-to-column catch
is more extreme though the principle of
providing an additional pawl is identical. The
pattern-wheel (6N) assembly and original catch

Catch pawl
fixing screw

C1) is more closely crowded towards the end

(6

framing pieces than the line pattern-wheel
assembly (A/166 End View) and there is

Catch pawl

insufficient space for a second column catch

Runaway pawl

without modification to the original catch.
The modified arrangement is shown in 337 L 24
(General Assembly) and specific layouts of pawls
and levers in 337 X 24 and X 25). The modified

Runaway pawl
fixing screw

catch is reversed i.e. is changed from a leading
action that blocks the pattern wheel advance, to
trailing edge action holding back the pattern
wheel. The column catch is also driven

C1) is operated

differently: the original catch (6

by a peg in the lower oscillating bar (working points

Fig. 6.14: Column-to-column runaway pawl.

e and 5e A/166 End View top left) i.e.

by direct lever action. The direct lever action has been changed to a gear-driven lever with
parts shown in 337 L 491-493. An additional runaway pawl is provided (337 L 24) that has a
leading-edge action i.e. blocks pattern wheel advance when engaged. The second catch is
also a gear-driven lever (337 L 494-497), itself driven by additional pegs in the lower
oscillating bar. The original pivot position of the first catch is unaltered and additional pivots
are provided for the pawl lever and second catch. The phasing of the two catches is
identical to that of the line catches i.e. the runaway pawl engages before the first catch is
withdrawn and is withdrawn immediately the first catch re-engages. The conversion of the
first column catch to trailing action has the incidental elegance of restoring the symmetry

116

6 Stereotyping

with the modified line catch arrangement opposite.
The modifications have minor consequences for the pawl profile and pattern wheel teeth.

C2 )s shown hooked for ratchet action, and a sawtooth

The tooth on the original line catch (6

on the reverse side so that the catch can be overridden against the leaf spring during rewind
(A/166 End View). The double pawl action makes the hooked tooth unnecessary and the
fact of the modified column and line catches both being trailing levers allows all four pawls
(line and column) to have radial tooth rises on the active faces. The original arrangement of
one leading and one trailing lever required different tooth profiles: standardising the pawl
profile also means that all the pattern wheels (line and column) can have the same tooth
profiles.
Pattern wheel selection is made by unscrewing the fixing screws (Fig. 6.13, A/166) and
sliding the two pawls (the original catch pawl and the additional runaway pawl) on shafts 6B
(line-to-line) and 5B (column-to-column) to engage with one of the pattern wheels in the
pre-mounted sets of four (see User Manual (2013), Setting Formatting Options, pp. 49, 513).
End-of-column Action
For line-to-line tabulation (i.e. down the page) when a pan reaches the end of a column
(bottom of the page) the mechanism engages a rewind clutch that automatically rewinds
one of the falling weights and also rewinds the pans back to top of page. The rewind clutch

F ) is shown in A/166 End View and Elevation, and A/163 bottom left.

(3

Integral with the pattern wheel is a line pattern wheel arm (3D A/166 Plan and End View)
which rotates with the pattern wheel. Each release of the pattern wheel rotates the arm
one increment clockwise, by an amount determined by the pitch of the pattern wheel teeth,
and this continues with the pattern wheel arm stepping its way clockwise until it approaches
the nine o’clock position. The line rocker lever is displaced to the left when the pattern
wheel is next released and a lug on the pattern wheel arm fouls the underside of the foot of
the line rocker lever (for foot shape see Fig. 6.11). This holds the pattern wheel arm just off
the nine o’clock position. On the return stroke the foot of the rocker arm moves to the right
and frees the obstruction caused by the pattern wheel arm which advances to nine o’clock
placing the lug (3D A/166 Plan) immediately behind (left) of the foot in the position shown
in A/166 End View and Plan. The foot of the rocker lever is now trapped between the fixed
end stop (Fig. 6.12) to the right and the lug of the pattern wheel arm to the left. This last

117

6 Stereotyping

pattern wheel movement positions the matrix pan to receive the last stereotyped line of the
column. With the foot of the line rocker trapped in its right-most position, the next outward
(left) stroke of the lower bar throws the upper bar left beyond the 13/16" by the lever
action of the line rocker lever turning on the moving pivot.
In the case of multiple-column stereotyping the extended throw of the upper bar at the endof-column, releases the column pattern wheel to rotate, driven by the falling weight

A

(A/166 End View) one tooth anti-clockwise. The catch is released by a fixed pin on the

upper oscillating bar acting on the catch release lever (working points 5o , 9o A/166 End
View top left). This drives the travelling platform to the next column along (right to left in
A/147 Elevation) i.e. drives the carriage across the page, right to left as seen from the front
of the Engine, to position the matrix pan in the new column position.
As in the case of the line-to-line pattern wheel there is no provision in the original design to
prevent runaway in the event of incorrect engine speed or the engine cycle halting with the
column catch disengaged, and a second column catch was added to provide an escapement
action as a precaution to prevent runaway (see Runaway, p. 113). The column-to-column
drive from the pattern wheel to the carriage is via bevel gears (F A/163) and in outline (red)
in A/147 End View). The column pattern wheel directly drives the shaft 6H (A/166 plan)
which drives the cross-shaft 1K (A/163, A/147 End View) via the bevel gears. The columnto-column drive train is completed by the racks and pinions at each end of the frame and
shown in red (Fig. 6.5, A/147 End View).
Rewind Clutch
The second effect of the extended throw
of the upper oscillating bar is to engage

Dogs

F A/166 End View

the rewind clutch 3

and Elevation, and A/163 bottom left.
This is a dog clutch that engages to
automatically rewind one or another of
the falling weights and, via the pattern

Ramps

wheels, rewinds the travelling platform to
the top of page. The clutch is mounted on

Fig. 6.15: Clutch bar for rewind clutch.

C that runs on the

the main drive shaft 4

underside of the engine (A/163 , A/166 Elevation and End View). A clutch bar (Fig. 6.15),
which is part of the bobbin 3

F (A/166 Elevation and shown diagonally top left to bottom

118

6 Stereotyping

C

right A/166 End View), is fixed to the main drive shaft (4 ) by a sliding key, and rotates
continuously during a calculation run. The bobbin and clutch bar are able to slide along the
shaft on the sliding key.
The clutch is shown disengaged in A/166 Elevation (Fig. 6.17) i.e. the inner lugs on the clutch

S (A/166 Elevation, Fig. 6.17, in red).

bar are clear of lugs on the stationary gear wheel, 2

The clutch is engaged by the clutch lever (5 2 , 5 1 A/166 Elevation and End View, Fig. 6.23)

B
B

B

when the forked end of the clutch lever (5 2), pivoting on short shaft

V (A/166 End

Elevation and End View) drives the clutch bar so that the inner two lugs on the
clutch bar are in the same plane as the matching lugs on the stationary gear wheel
(left to right A/166 Elevation). The clutch lever (Fig. 6.23) is operated by the ramp on
the upper oscillating bar shown as an arrow shape in A/166 Plan. The lower ramped
edge (working points 9r , A/166 End View and Plan) throws the top of the lever out when
the upper oscillating bar is thrown forward (right to left A/166 End View) by the end-ofcolumn condition. The lever-action on pivot V drives the forked lever to slide the clutch bar
towards the stationary gear wheel.
As the clutch bar sweeps round, the two inner lugs on the bar engage with two lugs on the
stationary gear wheel 2

S (A/166 Elevation, in red) (working points 3t , 2t and 3r , 2r

A/166). The lugs are 180 displaced and on different pitch circle radii so that the outer and

S anti-

inner lugs only engage with each other. The clutch bar drives the gear wheel 2
clockwise (A/166 End View) which rewinds the line pattern wheel via gear 4
pattern wheel is automatically rewound: 4

W. Only one

W engages with either the line-to-line pattern

wheel or with the column-to-column pattern wheel but not both. The selection is made by
sliding 4W along its shaft and dropping the change-over latch 2Z into one of two slots in the
spacing sleeve on fixed shaft A (A/166 End View, Fig. 6.16). The extra thickness of

S ensures that 4W

gearwheel 2

remains in engagement in either
position. In the worst case of threecolumn format (small type only) the
column pattern wheel has sufficient

Selection
slots

rotational reserve to drive the
carriage across the page without
rewinding. In the case of line-to-line
stereotyping in multiple columns, the
column pattern wheel is rewound by
hand. In the case of column-to-

Fig. 6.16: Change-over drop-latch for rewind clutch.

119

6 Stereotyping

column stereotyping, the column pattern wheel is rewound automatically and the line-toline pattern is rewound by hand at the end-of-page. (For detailed step-wise procedures see
User Manual (2013), Converting from line-to-line to column-to-column, p. 58).
The two actions that follow from the throwing forward of the top oscillating bar when the
end-of-column condition occurs are: releasing the column pattern wheel to position the pan
to receive the last line of the column; and engaging the rewind clutch that rewinds the lineto-line pattern wheel so positioning the matrix pan to receive the next stereotyped result as
the first entry of the new column at top of page.
The clutch is thrown out of engagement after about 340 rotation by two fixed ramps (6N

blue pencil A/166 Elevation and End View, Figs. 6.17, 6.8) engaging with mating ramps on
the clutch bar (working points 3a , 6a and 3c , 6c A/166 Elevation). The ramp on the
upper oscillating bar, which originally activated the clutch lever, has long since withdrawn
and the clutch lever is driven back to the disengaged position by the action of the two
ramps, 6N. The line pattern wheel is held in the rewound position, with the weight raised,
by the first line catch which rides over the teeth during rewind, with a leaf spring providing
the return force. The line pattern wheel rotates less than one full revolution driving the
matrix pans from top of page to bottom so that when the pattern wheel arm is at the start
position i.e. when the pan is at top of page, the arm is past (clockwise) the nine o’clock
position: there are no spurious end-of-column actions during a page run as the pattern
wheel arm only reaches nine o’clock once in a traverse down the page. The clutch bar
rotates continuously during calculation i.e. its motion is not interrupted by engagement or
disengagement.
The column pattern wheel pulley has sufficient reserve of cord to drive the carriage fully
across a page without rewinding; the line pattern wheel pulley has sufficient cord reserve to
drive the carriage down the page once without rewind. In single or multiple columns in lineto-line or column-to-column format a full page of results can be produced without
interruption for manual rewinding. In the case of single-column stereotyping no manual
rewind is required at all even at end-of-page: the line pattern wheel is rewound
automatically and the column pattern wheel is never released to rotate since no left-to-right
traverse across the page is needed. Any column pattern wheel can therefore be used for
single-column operation as the pattern wheel arm rather than the pattern wheel is the
effective component. Once set at three o’clock at the start of page, the column pattern
wheel arm (6D , A/166 End View) remains in this position to trigger the end-of-page

120

6 Stereotyping

Fig. 6.17: Travelling platform control, Elevation (A/166).

121

6 Stereotyping

sequence. For column- to-column stereotyping, the column pattern wheel is rewound
automatically at the end of each line and the line pattern wheel is rewound by hand at the
end of a page. Both manual rewinds occur with the engine halted after a page is complete.
Modifications to the Rewind Clutch
In the original design the clutch-driven rewind returns the carriage from the end-of-page
position to top-of-page i.e. rewind is always full-length. For fifty- and sixty-line formats,
which fill the page top to bottom, the full-page rewind is unproblematic. However, thirtyline formats pose difficulties. Only about half the circumference of the thirty-line pattern
wheel will have teeth (194 from first to last tooth, 337 L 409) with the remaining sector
blank. Since a run always finishes with the carriage at the limits of its travel (from front-toback facing the engine), it is the start position of the run that varies and the thirty-line run
will begin about half way down the pan. The first section of the pattern wheel will therefore
be untoothed. The problem is that when the clutch dogs disengage at the end of rewinding
to top-of-page, the carriage will run away until the line catch engages with the first tooth. A
runaway of nearly half the full travel of the carriage would cause a damaging crash when the
line catch finally engages – something to be avoided.
The thirty-line option is not specifically indicated in the original design and it could be
argued that the runaway problem is a consequence of arbitrarily choosing a reduced page
length. However, even if the original design was restricted to full-length formats, the
consequences of fixed rewind still affects operation in column-to-column mode. Once
again, the last column position is the fixed reference and it is the start positions for two and
three column formats that differ. If separate column pattern wheels are dedicated for twoand three-column formats then a two-column pattern wheel would have roughly its first
third blank and the problem of the column catch crashing into engagement on the first
pattern wheel tooth persists. The original design makes no provision for damping or
governing the column-to-column traverse of the carriage.
Variable Rewind
If the amount of rewind could be made adjustable then the carriage could be rewound by
the clutch to an appropriate start position and both the potentially damaging situations
avoided. An additional advantage of an adjustable partial rewind is that the number of
formatting options using four column pattern wheels can be increased. Instead of
dedicating separate pattern wheels for two- and three-column working, each of the four

122

6 Stereotyping

wheels could provide for full three-column working but only part rewound for two column
working. (Any of the wheels can be used for single-column working as the column pattern
wheel does not move.) The column pattern wheels can then be used to provide a wider
range of margin-width options.
The time window for any rewind action is fixed by the engine speed i.e. the speed of the

C.. How much rewind takes place within the window depends on the start

main drive shaft 4

and end times of the rewind action. Rewind action starts when the lugs on the rotating
clutch bar encounter the rewind lugs on the gear wheel 2

S ; rewind action stops when the

clutch is disengaged i.e. thrown out of engagement by the two ramp lugs acting on the outer
lugs of the clutch bar. Reducing the amount of rewind can be achieved by delaying the start
of the rewind action, or advancing its end point. The first can be achieved by making
provision for adjusting the angular position of the clutch bar in relation to the main drive

C.. Adjusting the clutch bar anticlockwise (A/166 End View) will delay the start of the

shaft 4

rewind action keeping the end point fixed. Advancing the end point can be achieved by
making provision for adjusting the angular position of the fixed ramp lugs (6N blue pencil
A/166 End View). Adjusting these clockwise will advance the disengagement of the clutch
and so reduce the amount of rewind.
There is no conclusive evidence from the drawings as to whether the original design was
intended to cater for variable rewind. A/166 End View and Elevation show two rewind lugs

r

(working points 2t and 2 ) but these are shown integral with the gear wheel 2

S with no

provision for adjustment. Similarly there is no evidence of provision for adjusting the

C

angular position of the clutch bar in relation to the main shaft 4 . There is the suggestion
of a backplate supporting the two ramps that disengage the clutch (6N blue pencil A/166
End View) which could be a placeholder for a detail to follow of how the backplate may be
fixed in different positions. But no detail is provided.
The upshot was to go ahead with provision for variable partial rewind to solve the problem
of the start-of-page runaway in line-to-line mode in thirty-line format, and to provide the
extra range of formatting options using four column pattern-wheels. The means of doing so
was to make provision for adjusting the angular position of the rewind lugs on the gear
wheel 2

S (Parts details 337 L 521 (M 383), 337 L 522). Instead of the rewind lugs being

integral with the gear wheel, the lugs are mounted on a backplate the angular position of
which can be varied in relation to the gear.

123

6 Stereotyping

The web of the clutch gear is
drilled with eighteen holes
at 20 intervals, and the
backplate, which nests
inside the gear, is fixed to
the web by two ring screw

Backplate

studs which pass through

Mounting
holes

any of the pairs of
diametrically opposite holes
(parts details 337 L 521 and
L522). To adjust the amount
of rewind the plate is
rotated until the engraved
mark lines up with the

Ringscrew
studs

Dogs
Fig. 6.18: Modified clutch gear.

pattern wheel letter on the
clutch gear. The ring screw studs fix the plate in the new position. The eighteen holes
provide a series of fixed 20° angular increments through which to reduce the amount of
rewind. The further clockwise the backplate is fixed the shorter the rewind.
Redesign of the Rewind Clutch
The clutch bar is intended to slide into engagement without load, drive the clutch gear via
two lugs, and then disengage under load driven by ramps. In trials it was found that under
load, sliding friction between the faces of the engaged lugs, and bobbin friction on the
keyway and shaft prevented the clutch bar from disengaging i.e. under load the angle of the
ramps was too steep to exert sufficient force to slide the clutch bar and bobbin out of
engagement. Finger-tip rotational pressure was sufficient to produce a jam indicating that
keyway friction was almost certainly the main cause of the problem.
The clutch was redesigned to reduce the force required to disengage by:
1. Eliminating keyway friction: the bobbin is no longer keyed to the shaft
2. Reducing the contact area between the driving and driven lugs
3. Using shallower ramps i.e. smaller lead angle, and helical profile.
The new mechanism is shown in Figs. 6.19, 6.20. The bobbin is no longer keyed to the drive
shaft but fixed, and the clutch bar (Fig. 6.15) is replaced by a pawl assembly consisting of an
inner pawl (337 M 385) and an outer pawl to provide engagement with the two clutch gear

124

6 Stereotyping

lugs which have differing pitch circles as in the original design. Integral with each pawl is one
half of the ramp. The pawls rotate separately on spigots in the pawl housing (M386). The
clutch gear remains unchanged but the dogs in the modified clutch are clawed.
The pawl assembly is keyed to
the shaft and rotates

Outer pawl

continuously. Each pawl has a
pin on the centre-line through
the large drive shaft, which
projects into the axial path of
the bobbin flange. To engage
the clutch the bobbin slides

Ramp

towards the clutch pushed by
Inner pawl

the forked yolk. The bobbin

Bobbin

flange pushes the pawl pins to

Fig. 6.19: Modified bobbin and pawls.

rotate the two pawl claws into
the path of the lugs fixed to the clutch
gear. This is done ahead of
engagement so the load on the forked
arm is small as it is only required to
turn the unloaded pawls a few
degrees. As the pawl assembly rotates
the pawls engage with the rewind lugs
and the clutch gear is driven
anticlockwise. The pawls stay engaged
until thrown out of engagement by the
stationary fixed ramps on the ramp
ring (337 L 512).
The lead angle on the ramps was
reduced from 11.5° to 7.5° which
produces less axial travel to throw the
pawls out than in the original design

Fig. 6.20: Modified rewind clutch assembly.

as less travel is needed to disengage
the dogs than previously, and the smaller angle gives a greater mechanical advantage. The
contact area between the claw of the pawl and the driven lug is also reduced which reduces
the force required to throw the clutch out of engagement.

125

6 Stereotyping

The bobbin acts on the pawls at 307° into the cycle. For maximum rewind the pawls engage
with the driven lugs at 323° i.e. there is a minimum of 16° during which the pawl assembly
rotates without load. For shorter rewind options the unused motion is proportionately
greater. The lugs take the clutch gear 8° past its starting catch. When the pawls disengage,
the clutch gear drops back 8° and the weight is held raised.
The rewind clutch was the only device in the original design that required modification
through redesign. The new mechanism fits into the same space, is based on the same
principle, and was devised to ensure reliable disengagement.
End-of-page
With line-to-line operation in multiple columns, if the page is incomplete when stereotyping
reaches the end of a column, the control mechanism traverses the carriage to the next
column and rewinds the carriage to top of page as described above (see End-of-column
Action, p. 117. If the page is complete at the end-of-column then the control mechanism
automatically halts the machine to allow the pans to be replaced.
The end-of-column condition is indicated by the line pattern wheel arm (3D, A/166 End
View) reaching the nine o’clock position which initiates the release of the column catch by a
peg on the upper oscillating bar operating the column catch release-lever. In the case of
multiple-column stereotyping the column pattern wheel increments to the next tooth
position and the column pattern-wheel arm (6D, A/166 End View) rotates anticlockwise
towards the three-o’clock position; in the case of single column stereotyping the column
pattern wheel arm is set at three o’clock at the start of page and remains stationary
throughout. The end-of-page condition occurs when the line pattern-wheel arm is at nine
o’clock signalling end-of-column and the column pattern-wheel arm is at three o’clock
signalling the last column. The co-incidence of these two conditions initiates the end-ofpage action via the cluster of levers and trips shown between the two pattern wheels
(A/166 end view).
Stop Weight
The end-of-page action triggers the release of weight

C (A/166 End View, bottom centre)

L 1 (A/166 End View red outline). The engine is

suspended by a cord over stop pulley 3

halted when the weight is released into the trough (B) below (A/163 bottom left, 337 L 27.
The falling weight operates the trip lever (B) (Fig. 6.21) which, via a chord and pulley
arrangement, primes a scoop cam to disengage the main drive clutch at the top of the cam
stack. The clutch breaks the drive between the operator’s handle and the bevel gear of the

126

6 Stereotyping

cam drive-shaft and the Engine

Counterweight

halts with the crank handle
turning freely with the Engine
stationary in the halted state (see
7.2 Uncoupling Clutch: Automatic
Halting, p. 153). The geometry of
Trip
lever

the stop weight is uncertain. The
depiction of the weights in A/166

Stop
weight

Cradle

end elevation could be taken to
be diagrammatic i.e. the simple

Fig. 6.21: Stop weight trip lever.

rectangles not being
representative of actual shapes. The only other depiction is in A/163 bottom left. The
completion trip is shown here strictly as a gutter though the geometry of the stop weight
could be taken as a sphere or cylinder. It was first thought that the stop weight would be
lifted clear of the sides of the gutter when manually rewinding it and that in its rest position
it would dangle clear of the sides making the chord liable to twist under its own weight and
fail to re-engage when next lowered. So it was assumed that the weight was intended to be
a sphere and the trip lever a form of scoop. It transpires that in its rest position of the stop
weight remains contained by the trough as drawn, so a modified cylindrical geometry was
chosen (Fig. 6.21).
End-of-page Control

L 1 , is controlled by two radial levers (3L 2 , 3L 3 Fig. 6.22, A/166 End

The stop pulley, 3

View and Plan) both of which are integral with the boss of the stop pulley. The levers are
shown between nine and ten o’clock and between ten and eleven o’clock (A/166 End View,

L 2 ) is the column stop, the other (3L 3) is the line stop. Each of the

Fig. 6.22). One lever (3

levers is obstructed from clockwise motion by a trip lever (T1, 2T1) which rock on fixed pivots
(P, 2P) and are each in the same plane as the two related levers. Both trips need to be
released to release the stop pulley: releasing one and not the other has no effect i.e. the
arrangement is a mechanical AND gate requiring both release conditions to be met. The line
and column trips (2T2, T2) are operated by extra arms 1B , 1

A (Fig. 6.22, A/166 End View),

integral with the line and column rockers respectively. The arm on the line rocker is shown
at roughly nine o’clock (A/166 End View) and that on the column rocker at three o’clock.
The end-of-column condition occurs when the line pattern-wheel arm (3D A/166 End View)
reaches nine o’clock; the end-of-page condition occurs when the line pattern-wheel arm

127

6 Stereotyping

Fig. 6.22: Stop weight release control (A/166, End View) (detail).

reaches nine o’clock and the column pattern-wheel arm reaches three o’clock i.e. the endof-page condition occurs when the end-of-column and last-column conditions are both met
at the same time. If the line pattern-wheel arm is at nine o’clock, the line trip is operated
during the outward stroke of the lower bar by driving the line rocker anticlockwise. The tilt
of the line rocker (dotted in A/166 End View) operates lever 2T1, 2T2 which releases line stop

L 3. Similarly, if the column pattern-wheel arm is at three o’clock the column rocker
operates the column trip to release the column stop 3L 2. Only if both these conditions are
3

satisfied is the stop pulley (3L 1) released. If either pattern wheel arm is not in its terminal
position (for example, end of first column in a multiple column format) then only the
opposite trip is operated with no net effect on the stop pulley.
The trips operate singly when one or the other, but not both, of the end-of-column and lastcolumn conditions are met. The trips also operate singly, and therefore without effect,
during the return stroke of the lower bar when neither terminal condition applies i.e. while
intermediate results are being stereotyped. It was observed earlier that while the upper

128

6 Stereotyping

and lower bars execute the outward stroke (right to left) together, the upper bar lags the
lower bar during the return stroke. During the hysteresis interval the line rocker (in the lineto-line configuration shown in A/166) tilts anticlockwise as the lower bar executes its return
stroke and the upper bar remains stationary. This tilt is sufficient for the line rocker to
release the line trip. The column trip is unaffected, and the single release, which occurs
with each oscillation of the bar, does not release the stop pulley. In the column-to-column
configuration the column trip is operated each time the lower bar executes the return
stroke again with no net effect.

Clutch
lever

Stop weight
reset lever

Fig. 6.23: Stop weight release control.

Conversion for column-to-column Stereotyping
The configuration of the mechanism shown in A/166 is for line-to-line stereotyping in single
or multiple columns. In this format each result is impressed below its predecessor to
generate a column of results. In the case of single column operation, at the end of a full
column, rewind to the top-of-page occurs to restart a new page or, in the case of multiple
column operation, to start a new column at the top of the same page. For column-tocolumn stereotyping the carriage needs to traverse right to left (facing the engine) to accept
successive results on the same line, then advance the carriage to the next line, and finally
wind the carriage back left to right to start a new line. For two-column stereotyping the

129

6 Stereotyping

carriage is driven left and right across the page alternately and line increments occur after
each pair of results; for three column stereotyping (option with small type only) the carriage
traverses twice to the left, advances front-to-back by one line increment every third result,
and rewinds fully to the right for start of new line (see 2. Overview, Figs 2.8, 2.9, p. 17).
The conversion from line-to-line to column-to-column operation is made by removing the

F ) (Figs. 6.7, 6.8, 6.9), A/166 End View) and refitting it

upper of the two oscillating bars (9
in an inverted position.

The upper bar is freed by removing the keeper pin (Figs. 6.9, 6.11) fitted across one pair of
guides shown second from the right in A/166 End View. Once the bar is inverted the keeper

v

is replaced. The two lugs on the upper bar (working points 9 A/166 End View) which hold
captive the upper end of the line rocker 1B in the line-to-line configuration, face upwards in
the inverted position, and are inactive. Two corresponding lugs to the left (9

v1) on the

A ) instead. The

upper bar become active by trapping the end of the column rocker (1

conversion is completed by transferring the removable pin on the lower bar to a
corresponding position on the left of the same bar to operate the column catch instead of
the line catch. In line-to-line mode the fixed pin at the right-hand end of the upper bar faces
into the page and is inactive. In the inverted position this pin faces out of the page and
operates the line catch. Finally, the rewind gear, 4W , is repositioned and fixed with the
change-over drop catch (Fig. 6.16) so as to disengage from the line pattern wheel and,
instead, drive the column pattern wheel via idler, 2M (A/166 End View). (See User Manual
(2013), Converting Format from Line-to-Line to Column-to-Column, pp. 58-59 for stepwise
procedures for the conversion.)
In the column-to-column configuration the column catch is released each cycle on the
outward stroke of the lower bar. The release of the column pattern wheel advances the
carriage to the next column via the drive train consisting of the shaft 6H (A/166 Plan and
End View), bevel gears 6L , 1

L (1L is on cross-shaft 1K A/147 End View. Also A/163),

pinions 1K and 1N (pinion 1K is pinned to the cross-shaft and so has the same identifier,
1K ) and racks 2

U2 and 2U1. (A/147 End View). The upper bar, driven now by the column

rocker rather than the line rocker, follows the lower bar on the outward stroke and the
13/16" travel is insufficient to operate the line stop. On the return stroke the upper bar lags
the lower bar as before. The column rocker operates the column trip during the return
stroke due to the tilt of the rocker arm during the hysteresis gap but unless the end-ofcolumn condition is met (line pattern-wheel arm at nine o’clock) this has no effect.

130

6 Stereotyping

In the case of two-column stereotyping the column pattern-wheel arm reaches the three
o’clock position after only one release and the arm will therefore reach the three o’clock
position every second cycle. As the arm is driven anticlockwise by the suspended weight
(

A ) the column pattern wheel arm (6D A/166 End View) fouls the underside of the foot of

the column rocker, and the arm is held just off the three o’clock position. On the return
stroke the foot of the rocker clears the pattern-wheel arm and the arm nudges home to
three o’clock. The carriage is now positioned to receive an impressed result in the second
column. On the next outward stroke of the oscillating bar (right to left) the pattern wheel
arm obstructs the foot of the column rocker and the rocker levers the upper bar to the left
(A/166) in excess of the standard 13/16" travel. The extended throw of the upper bar
allows the fixed pin in the upper bar to operate the line catch and the release of the line
pattern wheel advances the carriage by one line-increment. The extended throw also allows
the ramp on the upper bar (A/166 plan) to operate the clutch lever (5B2 and 5B1, Fig. 6.23)
and engage the clutch which rewinds the column pattern wheel as described earlier.
The sequence described is repeated with a line increment occurring after alternate column
pattern wheel releases. The line pattern wheel advances clockwise until the line patternwheel arm reaches nine o’clock. The end-of-page condition is met when both pattern-wheel
arms are horizontal and facing each other. On the next outward stroke the two trips are
released by the rockers. This releases the two stop catches and the stop pulley releases the
weight to halt the calculation run as before. For column-to-column stereotyping the column
pattern wheel is rewound automatically, and the line pattern wheel and stop pulley are
rewound by hand as part of the end-of-page procedure. (For stepwise procedures see User
Manual (2013), Resetting after End of Page, p. 56-7). For three-column stereotyping (small
type only) the column pattern wheel has three teeth and the line pattern wheel is released
after every two releases of the column pattern wheel.
Changing Pans
The matrix pans are more or less easily removed depending on where in the cycle the
Engine stops whether the halt is automatic as at end-of-page, whether deliberate by
stopping the manual crank, or through a fault. The two most convenient points are 240° to
remove and replace the large pan, and 350° to remove and replace the small pan (337 X 23),
and rather than struggling to free the pans from under the type heads, it is best that the
Engine is advanced to these positions to change pans if the halt position does not coincide
with either of these preferred points in the cycle.

131

6 Stereotyping

In the case of column-to-column operation, the pans will halt with the last-line position
under the type heads and the carriage partially returned towards the first column (left to
right facing the engine). For stereotyping with small type the small pan will be run out to
the left (A/147 End View), largely clear of the type heads, and can be removed and if
necessary renewed, with relative ease. Removal of the large pan, however, is obstructed by
both sets of type heads. For large type column-to-column operation this can be eased by reengaging the main drive clutch, advancing to the next cycle and halting the machine
manually at 230. This corresponds to the completion of the automatic carriage rewind
cycle and coincides with the disengagement of the rewind clutch. In this position the large
pan is fully run out to the right (A/147 End View) with the type heads positioned at the start
of page but with the next result not yet impressed. Removal and replacement of the pan is
relatively unobstructed in this position without disturbing the continuity of printed or
stereotyped results.
In the case of line-to-line operation the carriage will be partially rewound back down the
page (front-to-back facing the engine) when the machine halts automatically. In line-to-line
mode the removal and replacement of small or large pans will be partially obstructed by the
type heads. For small pan operation the solution is to remove the spacers and wedges
positioning the pan in the travelling frame and to move the pan towards the gap between
the type heads (left to right A/147 End View). The pan can then be slid out. For large pan
operation the solution is as described for column-to-column operation i.e. to re-engage the
main drive clutch and advance the cycle until the carriage is rewound to top-of-page, the
position shown in A/147 End View.
The account above is based on a reading of the original drawings and timing diagram before
construction. Following trials with the built Engine, modifications were made to allow the
output apparatus to be uncoupled from the calculating section and driven independently
using an auxiliary crank (Fig. 6.1). Advancing the travelling platform and positioning the
pans for unobstructed removal and replacement is more conveniently done using the
auxiliary crank after the output apparatus has been uncoupled from the main drive. For the
rationale and design of the uncoupling mechanism and auxiliary crank see 7. Release clutch
and auxiliary drive for output apparatus, p. 140).

132

6 Stereotyping

6.3 Formatting Options
The original drawings give no details of formatting options either as page-layout
descriptions or as pattern wheel profiles that would realise them. A/163 and A/166 simply
indicate a stack of four line-pattern wheels and four column pattern-wheels mounted on the
pattern-wheel shafts with no detail of pattern-wheel variations. The format options were
determined from scratch and the pattern wheel tooth layout derived from these.
The known constraints are: the size of the two matrix pans (A/147) which give the maximum
length and width of the two stereotyping areas; the positions of the lines of stereotyping at
top-of-page for a full page of results (A/147 End View); and the width of the column of print
for each of the two type sizes (30 by 1/16" for the small pan; 30 by 1/8" for the large pan).
(The number of digits in a result is not variable and is always thirty).
Some format features can be inferred from these known constraints. For example, when
stereotyping using both pans in multiple column format, the separation of the columns in
the small pan is determined by the column width of the larger type. The width of a largetype column determines the left-to-right traverse of the carriage to position the pan for the
next column. The margins between columns on the small pan are therefore wider than
would be the case if the column jumps were optimised for the small type.
The small pan has the width to accommodate four columns of type but if moved far enough
to the right (A/147 Elevation) for a start position close to the left hand edge of the pan, the
large stereotyping heads would foul the left-hand edge of the pan at the start (the span of
the small type heads is narrower than that of the large type heads but they are on the same
centre line, A/173, 337 X 23). If the large pan were removed to allow four-column
stereotyping then the drop weights would need to be adjusted to compensate for the
lightened carriage. The decision was taken to restrict the maximum number of columns to
three for small-type stereotyping. The maximum number of columns for large-pan
stereotyping is limited to two by the pan width.
In the absence of more detail in the original design drawings the following formatting
features were taken as discretionary: side margins, margin widths between columns for
multiple column formats, top and bottom margins, line height, and the number of lines
grouped together and separated by a blank line (five-line groups were chosen throughout as
consistent with the layout of contemporary printed tables). The number of lines in a column
or on a page, the line pitch, and top and bottom margins are chosen by selecting one of four

133

6 Stereotyping

line-pattern wheels A, B, C or D; column format combinations are chosen by selecting one of
four column pattern wheels E, F, G, or H. Each pattern wheel edge is stamped with its
identifying letter (337 X 23).
All four pattern wheels in a set are mounted on the pattern wheel shafts and are
conveniently exposed for access. Only one pattern wheel from each set of four is active at
any one time. The selection is made by sliding the line catch pawl to engage with the
chosen pattern wheel (A/166, 337 L 409) (Figs. 6.13, 6.14) (see User Manual (2013), Setting
Formatting Options, pp. 49-53). Pattern wheel D is left blank deliberately to provide for a
format combination not catered for by the other three wheels. The three line-pattern
wheels make provision for thirty, fifty or sixty lines per column — fifty for decimal
increments, thirty and sixty for sexagesimal increments (trigonometric and astronomical
tabulation) with the thirty-line format and large type used where large line spacing is
required. The full set of pattern wheel combinations and the layouts that result are shown
on 337 X 23.
Column formatting is controlled by the four column pattern wheels, E, F, G, and H. Only one
of the four is active at any time and the selection is made as before by sliding the column
catch to engage with the chosen wheel. All four column wheels provide options i.e. there
are no blank spares in the set of column wheels. The four wheels provide options for single,
double and triple column printing, with various combinations of margin widths between
columns. The specification of the pattern wheel layouts is shown in L409 A-D (line pattern
wheels) and L408 E-H (column pattern wheels). The hub for the pattern wheels is shown in
337 L 411.
Since automatic halting of the engine and automatic rewind of the travelling platform are
triggered by the end-of-page condition (line pattern-wheel arm at nine o’clock, column
pattern-wheel arm at three o’clock), end-of-page was taken as the fixed reference and
worked back from. A page-run therefore always ends in the same place with the last line
stereotyped for a given pan always at the foot of the page regardless of the number of lines
chosen (thirty, fifty, or sixty). Mapped back to the pattern wheel this means that the last
tooth of each wheel is in the same angular position and the pattern wheels are in fact
dowelled through at this position (337 L 409, L 411). On the line-pattern wheel the position
of the first tooth varies depending on the line pitch.
The same reasoning applies to the column pattern wheels. The column start position is
wound back from the pan position for the last column (right-most on the printed page) and

134

6 Stereotyping

the last column is always positioned the same distance from the right-hand vertical edge of
the pan. The smaller columns are centred on the larger columns because of the fixed
relationship between the large and small stereotyping punch wheels (A/173). These
constant right-hand margins are 0.75" for large type, and 1.6875" for the small. For single
column working these margin constraints still apply i.e. the single column will appear biased
to the right of the pan.
If the large pan is used in the position normally occupied by the small pan then the most
compressed format can be achieved by stereotyping two pages of results in one pan. This
occurs if two lots of three-column results, 30, 50 or 60 lines long are arranged back-to-back.
This is achieved by removing the pan after the first page run and reversing it before
replacing it on the carriage to receive the next run. The resulting layout is shown in X 23,
bottom left. The bottom three views show examples of other layouts. The middle view, for
example, shows a two-column layout in small type with a narrow column margin.
The various combinations of line and column formats is summarised in the Summary Table
in 337 X 23 (bottom right) with a few examples of the layouts in the diagrammatic views.
The top half of 337 X 23 shows the two carriages with large and small matrix pans. The view
at top right shows the large pan positioned to receive the first line of the first column. The
centre view of the large pan shows the end position i.e. positioned for the last line, last
column. The two views of the small pan correspond i.e. are depicted as they would be for
simultaneous stereotyping with large and small type. The columns of large and small type
are therefore aligned vertically with the spacing between columns determined by the width
of the larger type. The gap between the carriages at the end-of-page is a constant 0.137”.
Changing Formats
For a complete format change i.e. changing from line-to-line to column-to-column operation
as well as line number and number of columns, requires setting a new arrangement of the
oscillating bars, selecting the appropriate line and column pattern wheels, manually
rewinding to the start position either the line pattern wheel (for column-to-column working)
or column pattern wheel (for line-to-line working) and if necessary, adjusting the range of
the rewind clutch.
Stepwise procedures for resetting and changing formats are described in the User Manual
(2013), Changing Line Format, pp. 52-61.

135

6 Stereotyping

6.4 Additional Modifications
Modifications described above include:
1. Splitting the carriage between large and small matrix pans
2. Addition of two runaway pawls to prevent carriage runaway
3. Modification to the rewind gear to a allow partial variable carriage rewind
4. Redesign of the rewind dog-clutch to prevent jamming.
Several other modifications, precautionary and remedial, were made:
1. Addition of column-to-column dashpot to cushion carriage traverse
2. Additional anchoring of stereotyping table
3. Extensions to increase drop-height for falling weights
4. Provision for clamping the matrix pans
5. Additional guide for stop cord pulley
6. Reset lever for stop weight
7. Addition of uncoupling clutch and auxiliary drive for output apparatus
8. Modifications to framing support.
1. Column-to-column Dashpot
Babbage gives no details of formatting options or of the pattern wheel tooth layout to
achieve these. Common preferred formats were identified (337 X 23) and pattern
wheels specified to realise them. Balancing various layout combinations with pan
sizes and font heights, the maximum line-to-line carriage movement emerges as
0.275”. This is the maximum distance the carriage will advance in one complete
calculating cycle to generate one new result.
The falling weight that drives the platform line-to-line (

B , A/166 End View) needs to

be heavy enough to overcome initial static friction without initial hesitation.
However, if heavy enough to do this the carriage will accelerate rapidly until stopped
by the next pattern wheel tooth in an uncushioned impact with the line catch. With
only 0.275" linear travel between lines, the jarring is tolerable. However, in the case of
column-to-column traverse, the carriage travels as much as 5¼" between stops. The
uncushioned impact of a heavy carriage (made heavier by splitting into two equal
carriages) accelerating over approximately 5"was thought to be excessive and a
removable oil-filled dashpot was added to buffer the impact.

136

6 Stereotyping

The dashpot is fitted under the carriage
along the centre line of the carriage

Dashpot
cylinder

frame (Figs. 6.5, 6.24, A/147 Plan) in
direct line with the boss of the large idler
gear (6D A/163, for assembly detail see
337 L 22, for dashpot parts see 337 L 38).
The dashpot acts as a linear speed
governor. Its action is unidirectional. In
the damped direction (right to left of the

Fig. 6.24: Dashpot.

Plunger

carriage A/163) the piston forces oil
through an annular aperture. During the return stroke (left to right of the carriage)
the piston is driven against a spring and opens the oil-feed aperture to allow
undamped movement (337 L 22).
The rate of feed for a given grade of oil is adjusted by exchanging packing washers
from one side of the conical plunger to the far end of the return spring so as to alter
the size of the annular aperture. The arrangement ensures that the length of the
return spring remains constant for different feed rate settings. Since the carriage is
wound back during the return stroke the travel is controlled and damping was not
considered necessary.
Stepwise procedures for adjusting the degree of damping are described in the User
Manual (2013), Adjusting Dashpot Damping, pp. 61-3.
2. Additional Anchoring of the Stereotype Table
The table stand for the stereotyping apparatus falls outside the base rails that run the
length of the whole of the Engine (A/163, A/164) so the output apparatus and the
calculating section are not resting on the common base provided by the rails and no
fixing is shown between the table assembly and the calculating section. Additional
fixing was provided by extending the boss of the idler gear (6D A/163) to pass through
a bar fixed between the two vertical framing members of the calculating section. The
boss is secured on the far side of the bar by a collar. This arrangement allows the
correct registration of the table to avoid left-to-right tilt. Jacking points on the table
legs allow for adjustment and for correction of any tilt left-to-right or front-to-back.

137

6 Stereotyping

3. Drop-height for Drive Weights
Working back from the carriage to the pattern wheel pulleys for the travelling
platform falling weights shows that a pulley rotation of 340 is required for end-toend travel line-to-line. The corresponding length of the drop for the falling weights
and

A

B (A/166 End View) for the 9"-diameter pulley, indicated in A/166, is 26.7"

(340/360 x 9π). However, the drop from the underside of the weights to the floor is
only about 11". The extra drop is provided by additional pulleys suitably raised (L26).
The pulleys are mounted on extension arms fixed to the existing framework (Fig. 4.1).
No detail is given of the form of the falling weights
and

A

B (A/166 End View). Driving forces required will

depend on friction, traction, load, and eventually wear.
Increasing or reducing weight is anyway required to
compensate for the presence or absence of one or
another of the matrix pans. So that the appropriate
weight can be flexibly adjusted, each of the masses
and

A

B consist of ten separate weights some of which

are C-shaped i.e. a section of the ring missing to provide
a radial slot so that they can be stacked and removed
with a no dismantling (Fig. 6.25).

Fig. 6.25: Falling weights.

4. Pan clamping
No means of fixing the pans to the carriage is shown whether by screw fitting or
wedges (A/147 End View and Elevation). The left-to-right fixing (A/147 Elevation) was
retained as a slide fit of the pan into the machined tray in the carriage, and screw
clamps were used to locate and fix the trays front-to-back (337 L 25). Both trays have
two screw clamps bearing on two wedge inserts. In the case of the small pan, two
extension rods bridge the gap between the rear carriage wall and the edge of the pan
(rods 337 L 363, and cross-sliding guide 337 L 354). The rods and sliding guides are
removable loose pieces and the clamps are tightened with knurled nuts (Fig. 6.3).

138

6 Stereotyping

5. Stop cord pulley
The cord for the stop weight

C (A/166 End View, bottom

centre) is shown deflected from the vertical at two points
with no detail of the means by which the cord is to be
routed. A cord guide was added at the upper point of
deflection (detail 337 L 27).
6. Stop weight reset lever

Fig. 6.26: Stop cord routing.

The pattern wheels are exposed on the outside of the
control mechanism for the stereotyping table (Fig. 4.1, A/163, A/166) and these can
conveniently be gripped for manual rewind or by using the additional wooden
removable rewind handle. However, the stop pulley (3L 1, A/166 End View red
outline) is well buried in the mechanism and finger access for rewinding is restricted.
A lever was added to assist with the rewind.
It is desirable to restrict the rotation of the stop
pulley both clockwise and anticlockwise.
Anticlockwise restriction prevents the weight
being inadvertently lifted above the sides of the
trough or gutter during manual rewind, as well as
ensuring that the catches and trips remain
associated with the appropriate levers. Clockwise
restriction prevents the cord going slack and
jumping the pulley sidewalls when the stop
weight reaches the end of its travel when
dropping. A lever with unobstructed access was
added at the outer end of the stop pulley shaft to
assist rewind, and two stop pins added to restrict
the handle rotation to 180 i.e. between nine and
three o’clock (Fig. 6.27, 337 L 24).

139

Fig. 6.27: Stop-pulley reset lever.

6 Stereotyping

7. Release clutch and auxiliary drive for output apparatus
The original designs show the output apparatus as a single monolithic ‘hardwired’
assembly coupled directly to the calculating section. The output apparatus and the
calculating section form a single mechanically integral device with both parts driven

C , that runs the full length of the underside of the Engine
and driven by large bevel gears (A0, 4C ) under the cam stack (A/163 right bottom).
by a single unbroken shaft, 4

In the original design there is no provision for uncoupling the calculating section from
the output apparatus: to run the output apparatus one must run the Engine.
There are build, operational and maintenance reasons for wanting to run the output
apparatus and calculating section independently. During building, commissioning,
fault-finding and maintenance there are adjustments that require full or partial cycling
of the apparatus. Debugging faults often requires inspection of slowed-down motions
and the need for small incremental advances. With no facility for driving the printer
locally, cycling of the output apparatus requires two people – one at the main Engine
crank end and one at the output apparatus opposite, over eleven feet away and
unsighted. Advancing the printer by small increments is difficult with this
arrangement. With an additional drive local to the output apparatus one person can
operate the output apparatus and better control incremental advancement with the
mechanisms fully sighted.
There are also operational considerations. During tabulation there are occasions
when the output apparatus needs to be cycled without disturbing the rest of the
Engine: priming the inking rollers to ensure uniform ink distribution, advancing the
stereotyping moving platform so that the trays can be removed for refilling or
replacement, are two. In both situations the internal state of the calculating section
needs to remain undisturbed. Conversely, there are occasions when the calculating
section needs to be run without the output apparatus. Resetting the starting values in
the middle of a run, for example.
Provision was made for uncoupling the output apparatus from the calculating section
to allow each to be run independently of the other – this by splitting the drive shaft
into two, fitting a hand-operated in-line clutch at the join that allows the drive to the
output apparatus to be uncoupled from that of the calculating section, and to fit an
additional crank handle and a gear drive so that the output apparatus can be driven

140

6 Stereotyping

independently of the main engine crank. The clutch is engaged only when the Engine
and output apparatus are run together i.e. for normal operation.
Release clutch
The release coupling takes the form of a dog clutch. The clutch is fitted under the
calculating section located towards the output apparatus. An interlock arrangement
ensures that the drive can be disengaged and re-engaged if and only if the output
apparatus is correctly phased with the calculating section.
Auxiliary
crank

Fig. 6.28: Output apparatus release coupling.

Lock counterbalancing springs

The dog clutch consists of a steel disc on the
printer side pinned to the main drive shaft,
and a disc (bronze) on the main cam-stack side

Locking lever

keyed so that it can slide on the shaft. The
sliding disc is fitted with two dogs that engage

Sliding disc

with slots in the fixed disc (337 M 361, M 362).
There are three slots in the fixed disc, two
opposite each other to receive the drive dogs,
and one to receive the rocker lug for locking
the output apparatus. There is one slot in the
sliding disc to receive the rocker lug to lock the
calculating section. The clutch is operated by
Fixed disc

two levers, one at the front of the Engine (the
clutch lever, Fig. 6.31) that engages or

Yolk

disengages the clutch, the other at the rear of

Fig. 6.29: Release coupling. Rear view.

the Engine (the locking lever, Figs. 6.29, 6.30)
operates a rocker at the top of the clutch that acts as an interlock. The clutch lever
(front) engages and disengages the drive by sliding a yolk which slides the dogs into or
out of engagement. The clutch is engaged when the clutch lever is inclined to the right

141

6 Stereotyping

as seen from the front of the Engine (Fig. 31). The lever is held in the engaged or
disengaged positions by a knurled thumbscrew which fixes into one of two threaded
holes – this to prevent creep or accidental movement. The operation is fail-safe i.e.
there is no danger if the thumbscrew is not used to secure the lever.
The locking lever (rear) operates a rocker located at the top of the two discs. The
function of the rocker is to ensure that (1) the clutch cannot engage unless the

Locking
lever

Clutch
lever

Locking
rocker

Fig. 6.30: Locking lever
(view from rear).

Fig. 6.31: Clutch lever
(view from front).

calculating section and output apparatus are both at one, and only one, specific point
in the cycle (2) in the uncoupled state the printer is locked when the Engine is free to
run, and the Engine is locked when the printer is free to run: in one position the
rocker locks the calculating section and frees the output apparatus to turn; in the
other position it locks the output apparatus and frees the Engine to turn. The locking
lever can be fixed in one or another of the positions with a knurled screw as for the
engagement lever. For normal operation i.e. with the output apparatus coupled, both
levers face to the right as seen from the front of the Engine.
The Engine is locked at 35 units (252°) for the output apparatus to be run
independently (Timing Diagrams F/385/1 and 337 X 21). The reason for choosing 35
units for the uncoupling point is that in the event that the output apparatus requires

142

6 Stereotyping

attention during tabulation, the run of calculations can be intermitted with the
current result secured, the output apparatus can be attended to by running it using
the auxiliary crank, and the tabulation resumed with no interruption to the sequence
of results. More specifically, at 35 units the result of the current calculation is set and
locked in the results column, the result has been transferred to the print wheels and
stereotyping punch wheels but no action has yet been taken to print. When the
printer is run using the auxiliary crank (i.e. independently of the calculating section)
the positions of the printing wheels and stereotyping punch wheels remain set with
the result currently locked on the results column. After the output apparatus has
been run using the auxiliary crank it is advanced (using the auxiliary crank) back to 35
units for recoupling after which the printing cycle can resume with no disruption to
the tabulation sequence.
When the engine is run independently the output apparatus is locked at 0 units (337 X
21). The reason for this relates to the functioning of vertical lock (5L , A/174 Locking
Bar; also A/176, Fig. 4.7) that operates on the compound racks (n6R A/174) near the
results column. The compound racks are directly coupled to the last sectors and, in
general, move each calculating cycle whenever the Engine is run. The vertical lock for
the compound racks is driven by a cam in the output apparatus. If the Engine is to be
run independently of the output apparatus then the compound racks must be in their
unlocked state to prevent the mechanism jamming i.e. the output apparatus must be
locked at a point in the cycle where the compound rack locks are disengaged and the
compound racks free to move. Zero units was chosen as an appropriate and
convenient point to lock the output apparatus. This is not the only time the racks are
unlocked, but 0 is simple and convenient.
Detailed procedures are given in the User Manual (2013), Uncoupling the Drive, pp.
64-9 that describe the clutch lever settings to run the output apparatus and
calculating section separately, and for recoupling for normal use where the calculating
section and output apparatus operate together.
The following table summarises the lever positions, cycle points, and functional status
of the Engine and output apparatus when run separately and together.
In the table ‘right’ and ‘left’ are as seen facing the clutch lever and locking lever as
though operating them. So moving the locking lever (rear of Engine) anti-clockwise
moves it from facing right to facing left as seen while facing the lever.

143

6 Stereotyping

STATUS TABLE

Function

Run Printer Only

Run Engine Only

Run Both
Run Neither
(Both Locked)

Cycle
Units

Clutch
Lever
(Front)

Locking
Lever
(Rear)

Unit Locked

35

Left

Left

Engine

0

Left

Right

Printer

35

Right

Left

Neither

0

Right

Right

Both

Debugging using the Release Clutch
Use of the release clutch as a debugging aid for faults or jams that occur is limited.
The interlock mechanism of the clutch prevents the calculating section and output
apparatus being run independently at the same time. More importantly, uncoupling
can only take place at two specific points in the cycle, 0 and 35 units. Since it is only by
happenstance that a jam, for example, would occur at either 0 or 35 units It follows
that the clutch cannot in general be used to uncouple the two sections of the machine
to isolate them for the purposes of debugging a jam as it would not be possible to
cycle the Engine to the uncoupling points.
Auxiliary Crank
An additional crank was provided to drive the output apparatus when uncoupled from
the calculating section (Fig. 6.1, p. 100; Fig. 4.1, p. 49). The crank, pinion and 4:1
reduction gear are duplicates of the main drive handle at the main cam-stack end.
The drive pinion of the main crank is below the drive gear. In the auxiliary crank it is

144

6 Stereotyping

above (see 337 M 34 for detail). A chapter disc
and pointer to indicate the current point in the
cycle were fitted in the same style as that on
the main drive crank. The auxiliary chapter disc
is engraved to indicate key events in the
printing cycle particularly points in the cycle at
which the output apparatus and calculating
section can be coupled and uncoupled to
ensure correctly phased engagement. So the
engraved annotations differ on the two
chapter discs. The position of the crank arm is
lower than that of the main crank handle and
therefore less convenient to operate. However,
it does not obstruct access to the pattern

Fig. 6.32: Auxiliary crank.

wheels or stereotyping trays.
The main shaft bearing support as originally designed is shown in drawing A/165 top
left. An additional cast bearing (337 M 342) for the crank handle shaft and drive pinion
was piggy-backed onto the original bronze bearing (337 M 351 & 2 for drive pinion
detail and pinion shaft). The main shaft was extended to accommodate the drive
gear. The insertion of the clutch in the main drive shaft did not provide sufficient
extension of the shaft for the handle and drive gear and a new section of shaft was
made.
The crank has a ratchet that allows only unidirectional drive (337 M 345 for ratchet
detail; M 346 for pawl detail). The ratchet follows the same design as that of the main
drive with the difference that the ratchet on the auxiliary crank can be disengaged to
free the handle and also to prevent free-wheel clicking when the Engine is driven from
the main crank.
The auxiliary crank is disengaged by loosening two knurled nuts at the back of the
large driven gear and rotating ratchet cover plate 20° anticlockwise (as seen by the
operator facing the chapter disc) (337 M 357 for detail). The clockwise position of the
cover moves a pin which keeps the sprung pawl engaged. Rotating anti-clockwise
releases the pin, and the pawl is free to drop out putting the drive in neutral. The pin
does not actively disengage the pawl: it frees the pawl to drop out of engagement if it
stops at or near bottom dead centre. If the ratchet pawl does not drop out to put the

145

6 Stereotyping

drive in neutral, backing off the crank (anticlockwise) a few degrees will pop out the
pawl and disengage the drive.
It is possible to drive the Engine from the output apparatus crank but it is not
advisable to try: the output apparatus drive shaft has a smaller cross-section that the
main cam-stack shaft and the principle of smaller shafts driving larger ones is not
sound. There is also the risk of ‘wind up’ i.e. torsional loads producing twists in the
drive shaft which would affect timing. There is no ratchet release mechanism for the
main crank.
The order in which the modification was implemented was to leave the original drive
shaft intact and assemble the main shaft end bearing as originally designed. This is to
ensure exact alignment of the end bearing. Only when the end bearing was fitted and
aligned was the drive shaft severed to fit the clutch and an extended shaft added to
accommodate the hand crank and drive.
8. Modifications to Frame
The printer apparatus (the upper box-assembly of the output apparatus (Fig. 2.3, p.
12), A/163) is fixed to the vertical frame by four tapped fixings with the top two fixings
in tension taking most of the load. The original designs show no fixing provision other
than bolting to the frame. During assembly there was concern that these fixings would
be insufficient for the weight of the printing apparatus. The weight of the stereotyping
table below was less of a concern: it is a free-standing assembly supported by its own
legs and tethered to the frame with fixings that are adequate.
Provision was made to provide additional support for the printing apparatus to relieve
the fixings to the upper section. Four additional legs were provided (Fig. 6.33). One
pair supports the rear of the box frame i.e. where it abuts the main vertical frame of
the calculating section (Fig. 6.1, p. 100; Fig. 6.33, p. 147). Two heavy curved brackets
were added to the front framing and are supported by a fish-belly cross-member. The
fish-belly cross-member is supported by two additional legs, one at each end. The four
legs are turned steel with bright machine finish and period beading. The brackets and
fish-belly cross-piece are black cast iron. Bright finish on the turned steel legs was
chosen in preference to cast iron so as not to compete with the curved bracing of the
table legs (1A, A/163) in the original design, and a falling rather than a rising curve
chosen for the two brackets in preference to a rising curve as more in keeping with

146

6 Stereotyping

contemporary practice (Fig. 6.33). The four additional legs are fitted with jacking
screws for levelling and small mounting plates.

Additional
brackets

Fish-belly
Cross-member

Additional
legs

Fig. 6.33: Modifications to output apparatus support framing (during construction).

147

7 Drive

7.

Drive

This section describes the mechanisms for transferring power from the hand crank, the first
mover of the whole Engine, to the main cams and the mechanisms for producing the lifting and
turning motions of the axes to perform the repeated additions required for tabulation by the
method of differences. It also describes the main overall drive train and the automatic halting
feature.

B, A/163 main

The prime mover is a human operator turning the main crank handle (8

Elevation; Figs. 2.1, p.11; Fig. 3.1, p. 19). Power is transferred from the hand crank to the cam
stack drive shaft (B) via bevel gears (7M , C A/163 right).
The cam stack consists of a vertical tier of twenty-eight conjugate cams, keyed to be main
vertical shaft, which orchestrate the vertical and circular motions of the figure wheel, sector,
warning and carry axes in the adjacent calculating section. Circular motions are derived from
twelve cams in the upper section of the cam stack i.e. six pairs of conjugate cams 18A through
28

A, A/163. The vertical motion cams are the sixteen cams in the lower section of the cam stack
1A through 16A with 1A at the bottom (A/163). The cam between 20A through 21A is not labelled
and its number omitted in the sequence. This is probably to correct for the fact that if the cam
numbering is to follow a strictly monotone increasing sequence then the lowest cam in the top
upper set of twelve cams should start with 17A not 18A as annotated. This is corrected in A/160
right (see table Circular Motion Cams, p. 160 for renumbering). In the upper set of twelve cams
18

A and 19A form a pair, for example, as do 27A and 28A i.e. the cams shown closer together

belong to different pairs: the conjugate pairs are those further apart.
The mechanisms that translate the rotation of the cams into vertical and circular motions are
those shown in skeleton in the bloc below the eight figure wheel columns i.e. to the left
alongside the cam stack in A/163.
The circular motions for the figure wheel, sector and warning axes are intermittent and
reciprocating (bidirectional) consisting of a sweep through a fixed angle (a sector of a circle) for
the drive stroke and, presently, a return stroke. These motions are intermittent and phased to
occur at specific parts of each calculating cycle (337 X 21). The cams and cam-followers
translate the rotation of the cams into linear reciprocating motion of drive links which drive
sliding racks. The linear reciprocating motion of the racks is translated into circular
reciprocating motion driving the figure wheel, sector and warning axes by sector pinions fixed to
the base of the axes as shown in A/171 bottom right.

148

7 Drive

The circular motion for the carry axes is derived from a separate mechanism and not from cams
in the main cam stack. The mechanism, of which gears 7

P and 7N are part, is shown in A/163

alongside the right hand vertical framing member (3N2). The mechanism is driven by a sleeve

V and the output is intermittent circular motion of horizontal shaft 2B from which the

shaft 7

carry axes 1C 0 through 1C 6 are driven via bevel gears 2S 0 through 2S6 (A/163).
Vertical motions for the figure wheel, sector wheel and warning axes are
generated from the linear reciprocating motions of horizontal bars,
themselves driven by the cams and cam followers in the main cam stack. The
general principle is that linear reciprocating motion of the bars, which have
slots, drive bell cranks to lift and lower the axes. An indicative example is the
figure wheel axis (2T ) bell crank and slotted bar (12A ) in A/163 (Fig. 7.1).

B , and the drive shaft bearing (5F , 6F )

Interposed between the crank, 8

C ) that ensures that the main drive cannot be reversed

is a ratchet drive (8

i.e. that positive drive is unidirectional with the handle free to rotate in

Fig. 7.1: Bell crank,
even differences
(A/163) (detail).

reverse but without driving the shaft. The ratchet is coupled to the bevel gear via a rocker

K , 9D ) that is disengaged by a gut cable (l ) running from the output apparatus via a

clutch (3

series of pulleys. The clutch is activated by the stereotyping apparatus at the end of a page or
when the stereotyping trays have received a full complement of results. Activating the clutch
uncouples the drive and the Engine halts allowing the matrix pans to be renewed to receive new
results when the calculation resumes.
A status plate or chapter disc and pointer were added

Pointer

to indicate where in the cycle the Engine is at any

N

time. The brass disc is fixed to the phasing gear (7

A/163), which is in direct sight of the operator, and is
engraved with divisions every five units (0, 5, 15 etc.)
using Babbage’s fifty-unit cycle convention where
each five-unit interval corresponds to 36°. A single
rotation of the phasing gear corresponds to one full
calculating cycle. Key events are engraved with
annotations ‘Full Cycle’ (zero), ‘Set Odd’ (20 units),
‘Half Cycle’ (25 units) and ‘Set Even’ (45 units). A
swan-necked pointer is fixed to the left front upright,
as seen facing the crank, and acts as a datum. Status
indication is indispensable during the procedures for
setting initial conditions where, for example, the
Engine needs to be advanced to 10 and 35, and then

149

Chapter
disc
Rocker
clutch
Fig. 7.2: Chapter wheel and pointer.

7 Drive

20 and 45 units when setting initial differences on the figure wheel axes at the start of a
calculation. Status indication is also indispensable for debugging – indicating the point in the
cycle of a jam, for example. There is no provision in evidence in the original design for indicating
where in the cycle the Engine is at any given time.

C , A/167) driven
by the main cam stack shaft, B. These drive the output apparatus via drive shaft, 4C , which
On the underside of the cam stack is a second pair of large bevel gears (A0 ,4

runs the length of the underside of the engine (A/163). There is a separate set of cams local to
the output apparatus that controls the internal operations and timing of the printing and
stereotyping apparatuses (see Cams, Drive and Control, p. 96).
Main Drawings:

A/159, A/163.

Related Drawings: A/160, A/164, A/165, A/167.

7.1 Main Crank and Ratchet Drive
The crank consists of a drive arm (8B , A/163) and a drive handle. The handle is made
from lignum vitae which, though not specified, was regarded as typical of the time. The
handle is free to turn on a shaft which is peened over at each end. A thrust washer is fitted
at the outer end. The length and thickness of the arm are taken from A/163 and A/164.
There is no end elevation of the crank so the intended shape of the arm is not known. The
final form was taken as in keeping with contemporary practice.
The ratchet prevents the engine being driven in reverse which would damage the
calculating mechanism, and allows the operator to best position the handle for controlled
effort to cycle the Engine from standstill. The ratchet also allows the operator to nudge the
Engine, by increments, to a particular point in the calculation cycle by repeated short
controlled pulling movements (see User Manual (2013), Operating the Engine, p. 15-19).
This is especially useful during the procedure for setting up initial values, adjustment and
fault-finding. The position that most favours controlled turning or incremental nudging is
with the handle at waist-height at the start i.e. with the handle at the lowest point, and
drawn towards the operator by pulling. (Operator’s left hand is closest to the cam stack.)

D, and

The ratchet mechanism consists (A/159, end view and section) of a ratchet wheel ,1

E,

matching pawl, 2

C . A leaf spring

housed in a pawl wheel which acts as its casing, 8

fixed to the pawl acts against the inside of the case to bias the pawl. The pivoted end of
the pawl is tucked against a machined pocket in the side wall of the case and this takes the
load rather than the pawl pivot which is a loose fit. The pawl is sandwiched in place by the

150

7 Drive

pawl wheel cover (8

I ) which is rebated into the case and secured with counterbored

cover screws (A/159 shows the case with the cover removed but the fixing screws fitted.).
Counterbores for the pawl wheel cover fixing screws have insufficient clearance from the
wall of the casing and the section view (A/159) shows the cover fixing screws breaking
through the back of the case. Fixing screws were reduced from 5/16" to 1/4" BSW, the
head reduced to 7/16" and the length was shortened to avoid breakthrough. The case is
cast and machined.
The outer circumference of the case was
extended to take 56 gear teeth to allow a 4:1
reduction in the drive. The addition of
reduction gearing was in response to concern
that an operator would be unable to exert
sufficient force to turn the engine over. The
additional parts for reduction gearing are a 14teeth pinion (337 D 323), a crank (337 D 322)
and a horseshoe mounting (337 D 321) for the
pinion (Fig. 7.9). The crank, to which the crank
arm is fixed, is a repeat of the wheel crank
above the handle shown in Fig. 7.3. The boss
of the crank is keyed to the pinion, and the
drive arm is fixed to the crank with a shoulder
screw (337 D 327). The mounting is fixed to
the underside of the cam stack upper
mounting plate. Using the reduction gear is
optional: the handle crank can be removed by
undoing the shoulder screw and refixing the

Fig. 7.3: Main crank and reduction drive.

drive arm directly to the ratchet wheel crank,
as originally intended and as shown in A/163. With the reduction gearing the Engine is four
times easier to turn but runs four times slower. With the 4:1 gearing the average time for
one calculating cycle is 6 seconds i.e. ten results per minute.
Without the reduction gears the engine is driven by turning the handle anticlockwise as
seen facing the crank. The addition of the reduction gearing reverses the direction of the
drive. The main loads on the drive occur as brief shock loads at the start of the cycle (unit
zero) and at the half-cycle point (unit 25). These spike loads are caused by all the figure
wheel locks operating simultaneously (Timing Diagram 337 X 21) creating two short peak
loads in each full cycle. Less severe point-loading occurs 10 and 35 units when two sets of

151

7 Drive

locks operate, but not simultaneously.
As mentioned, for the convenience of the operator the handle is best positioned at the
lowest point (roughly waist height) for a controlled pulling action to overcome the start-ofcycle load. Without the reduction gears the half-cycle load would occur at the top of the
arc requiring a pushing action which is awkward and might reasonably have encouraged
Babbage to fit a reduction gear of his own. So an additional advantage of the reduction
gear is that the full- and half-cycle loads both occur with the handle at the bottom of its
travel and can be overcome by a pulling action, which is more controllable than a pull at
the low point of the crank, and a push at the top as would be the case with a single-turn
cycle. The calculating mechanism is susceptible to jamming if the drive is not steady, firm
and at constant speed. The mechanism is especially susceptible to jamming if the
transitions through the points of shock loads is hesitant. Anything that assists in achieving
even drive reduces the risk of jams so being able to pull the handle at its lowest point to
ride the vulnerable time windows is a more than trivial benefit.
During commissioning and debugging it was found that a useful way of unlocking jams was
to reverse the drive, and a means of doing this using the hand crank would have been
useful. In the event, reversing was accomplished by gripping the cams and backing the
engine off by turning the cam stack a short distance in reverse. It is difficult to back the
engine off more than a very short amount in this way because of the load and the
awkwardness of the movement. For many jams simply releasing tension by backing off (i.e.
with minimal rotation) is sufficient. No provision in the original design was made to disable
the ratchet drive to provide positive drive in the reverse direction and none was
introduced, as deliberate or inadvertent reverse drive at an inappropriate point in the
calculating cycle runs the risk of damage to the calculating mechanism.
Lubricating the Cam Stack Shaft Bearings
The cam stack drive shaft (B, A/163) is
held at the top by a journal bearing in the

F , Fig. 7.4) and is

upper framing plate (8

supported below by a thrust bearing in

B (A/160 and

the lower framing plate 5

A/163). Detail of the thrust bearing is
shown in A/160 lower right. The bearing
consists of an inverted cup-shaped collar,
keyed to the shaft, resting in an annular

Fig. 7.4: Cam stack bevel-gear drive.

oil bath rebated into the lower framing

152

7 Drive

B (Fig. 7.5). No provision in the original drawings is made for lubricating the cam

plate, 5

shaft bearings: access to the annular oil bath is obstructed by the closely spaced cams in
the lower section of the cam stack, and the upper bevel gear (C) obstructs access to the
upper journal bearing.
Provision was made for lubrication: oil is supplied to
the bearings through an oiling hole in the upper bevel
gear (C ) and conveyed along the length of the cam
stack shaft to the thrust bearing through a channel
machined into the shaft opposite the driving keyway.
Oil collects in an unsighted oil cup fitted to the upper

F ) under the bevel gear (C). This acts

framing plate (8

as a reservoir and prevents oil spreading over the
upper framing plate. The oiling channel in the shaft

Fig. 7.5: Cam-stack thrust bearing
(A/160) (colour added).

starts off shallow and deepens to full depth below the
upper framing plate to assist flow. The shallow channel rotates in the oil cup and drains oil
into the channel lubricating the upper journal bearing at the same time. Oil drains down
the channel and collects in the lower oil bath which forms the lower half of the thrust
bearing. Internal overflow lubricates the lower journal bearing. To ensure that oil is
properly distributed over the bearing surface between the thrust collar and the annular
bath, two D-shaped cut-outs (D373) were machined into the thrust face of the collar. For
oiling procedure see User Manual (2013), Lubrication, p. 96).

7.2 Uncoupling Clutch: Automatic Halting
The Engine is automatically halted when the stereotyping apparatus reaches the end-ofpage i.e. when the stereotyping trays have received a full complement of results. The
control mechanisms for the detection of end-of-page are described in Chapter 6, p. 127-.

C

Briefly the end-of-page condition triggers the release of a falling weight ( , A/163 bottom
left, Fig: 6.20) in the stereotyping apparatus. The weight operates a trip lever (B) that pulls
a gut cord (l ) running from the trip lever at printer end of the Engine, through a series of

K , 9D A/163) at the main crank.

pulleys, to operate a rocker clutch (3

Activating the clutch uncouples the drive i.e. when operated, the clutch breaks the drive
between the crank handle and the bevel gear (7M , C A/163). The Engine halts and the
crank handle immediately runs free. With the Engine stationary in the halted state the
matrix pans can be maneuvered into positions from which they can be removed and

153

7 Drive

renewed with no interruption to
the correct sequence of results
that follow.
The clutch is shown in end view in
A/159 lower left (Fig. 7.7), and in
sectional plan centre left (Fig.

K ) has

7.6). The clutch rocker (3

a short lug and an extended lug
protruding from each of the
narrow the ends of the basic oval
shape of the rocker. The lugs
insert into pairs of slots machined
into the rim which stand proud of

J . The clutch

the clutch body, 1

J , rotates with the oval

body, 1

rocker, itself driven by the main

A . The extended

crank shaft 1

lug (left in Fig. 7.7) protrudes

J and,

beyond the clutch body 1

with the clutch engaged, inserts
between a pair of lugs on the
clutch bevel gear, 7M. (working

s s

points 3 -- 7 , A/159 end view)
to drive the bevel gear. The
rocker has two pivots that allow it

Fig. 7.6: Uncoupling clutch (A/159, Plan).

Fig. 7.7: Uncoupling clutch (A/159, End View).

154

7 Drive

rocker has two pivots that allow it to flip
between engagement and disengagement. The
clutch is engaged when the extended lug of the
clutch rocker is between the bevel gear lugs as
shown with the rocker vertical (A/159 sectional
plan, unbroken outline, Fig. 7.6), and disengaged
when the extended lug is clear of the bevel gear
lugs (shown inclined position in dotted outline).
With the clutch engaged the drive train consists

A ) via
K ) keyed to 1A ,

of the crank (8B , A/163) driving shaft (1

C

ratchet (8

); the rocker (3

drives the main bevel gear (7M.) via the
extended rocker lug positioned between the two
Scoop
cam

bevel gear lugs. Since the drive is in one
direction only the trailing bevel gear lug was
dispensed (Fig. 7.8) with and the clutch rocker no
longer needs to be aligned with the gap between

Fig. 7.8: Uncoupling clutch mechanism.

the lugs to re-engage.
The drive is disengaged by the operation of a scoop lever (9D) located on the cam-stack top
framing plate (Fig. 7.9). Mounted on the lever is a lozenge (scoop cam) that throws the
rocker out of engagement i.e. drives the extended rocker lug clear of the bevel gear drive
lug (lever 9D is not shown in A/159 sectional plan but is shown in section in A/163).

Scoop lever
Scoop cam

Upper framing plate

Main crank
pinion

Fig. 7.9: Uncoupling clutch scoop lever, framing plate, and pinion drive.

155

7 Drive

To disengage the drive, the scoop lever (9D), operated by the gut cord from the
stereotyping apparatus, moves the scoop cam from the solid to the dotted position (A/159
sectional plan). While the Engine is being driven the bevel gear (7M.) rotates anticlockwise
as viewed facing the crank (as in Fig. 7.8). With the clutch engaged (rocker position vertical
in A/159 sectional plan) the extended lug passes freely on the inside of the scoop cam
(bottom-to-top in A/159 sectional plan) i.e. the angled face of the lozenge is outside the
path of the extended lug and there is no consequent action. The action of the lever being
pulled in by the gut cord positions the scoop cam in the path of the rocker’s extended lug
and when this lug next traverses the bottom of its trajectory it engages with the inclined
face of the scoop cam, drives the scoop lever fully home, and is itself then driven out of
engagement i.e. clear of the bevel gear lugs, so breaking the drive train. The Engine halts
abruptly and the crank handle runs free.
With the clutch engaged there is no provision for
positively locating the scoop lever which rests

Pulley

free against the slack of the cable. The risk of the
scoop lever drifting into unwanted engagement
or into an end-on collision with the extended lug
of the clutch rocker was considered to be real. A
counterbalance was added to provide positive
resistance to the printer cable. The
counterbalance maintains cable tension which
prevents the long gut cord jumping its pulleys.
The counterbalance also resists the tendency for
the scoop lever to be pulled in unintentionally by
the trip lever, by any elastic tension in the gut, or
by any tendency of the gut to curl. The
counterbalance is provided by the addition of a
hanging weight suspended over a pulley fitted to
a rear framing member (Fig. 7.10). The pulley is
a repeat of that for the clutch cable at the front
of the Engine.

Fig. 7.10: Scoop lever counterweight.
(view from rear of Engine).

7.3 Circular Motions
The circular motions required for the figure wheel, sector, warning and carry axes for
repeated addition by the method of differences are described in Chapter 3. The circular

156

7 Drive

motions are executed in turn by the odd and even axes in a phased sequence described in
the timing notation (F/385/1) for the original design, and in a more detailed version for the
engine as built, 337 X 21. This section describes the drive mechanisms that generate the
required motions.
During addition the higher order difference figure-wheels, driven by internal drive arms
keyed to the figure wheel axes, are reduced to zero during giving-off. The vertical motion
mechanisms then raise the figure wheel axis which disengages the drive arms from the
internal lugs by lifting them clear. In the raised position the figure wheel axes return the
internal drive arms to the home position until lowered to reengage at the start of the next
calculating cycle. The circular motions therefore consist of two separate sweeps, one a
drive stroke and one a return stroke, separated by timing gaps and phased with the vertical
motions.
The sectors store the number given off and, after a timing interval restore the number
given-off to the figure wheels that were its source. During giving-off the sectors are driven
by the figure wheels. When restoring, the sectors are driven by restoring arms bearing
against internal drive lugs, and the sectors drive the freely rotating figure wheels to restore
the number registered before reduction to zero. The restoring arms return to the home
position ready for the next cycle. The circular motions of the sector axes therefore consist
of a drive stroke, which restores the number to the figure wheel, and a return stroke,
separated again by timing gaps and phased with the vertical motions.
The circular motions of the warning axes reset the carry warning mechanisms by a forward
sweep followed immediately by a return sweep which restores the mechanism to the
unwarned position. These reciprocating circular actions are intermittent and phased to
occur at the appropriate points in the timing cycle.
The final phase of the carriage of tens is executed by helices of rotating carry arms on carry
axes. The circular motions of the carry axes are not derived from the circular-motion cams
in the cam stack but by a separate intermittent drive mechanism (7

P , 7N , 2G , 2F

A.

A/163) coupled to the main drive by shaft 1

Apart from the intermittent drive for the carry axes, circular motions are derived from six
pairs of conjugate cams located on the upper section of the cam stack (A/163). These
twelve cams drive cam-followers that rock on fixed pivot shafts (A/170). The arrangement
converts the continuous circular motion of the cams to rotational reciprocating motion of
the follower arms. The six sets of follower arms drive links to long backing bars to which
sections of racks are fixed. Machined channels in the framing pieces form the slides for the

157

7 Drive

rack assembly (Figs. 7.11, 7.12). The racks mesh with sector gears which convert the linear
reciprocating motions into the required intermittent reciprocating circular motions for the
figure wheel, sector, and warning axes (A/171 lower right).

Rack

Fig. 7.11: Circular motion rack and sector gear. Figure
wheel axis (A/171) (detail).

Sector
gear
Fig. 7.12: Circular motion rack and sector gear for
figure wheel axis.

The distribution of the racks is best seen in A/163 (see also 337 B 22, and Construction
Drawings, Miscellaneous, Unknown 13.jpg). The racks for the four odd difference figure
wheel axes are 6P1, 6P3, 6P5, 6P7 and the associated rack segments are 2B1,2B3,2B5,2B7
(A/163). The four even difference figure wheel rack/sector pairs are in the run
immediately above (A/163). The sector wheel and warning axes circular motions have
similar arrangements (A/160) though not shown on A/163.
Main Drawings: A/159 left, A/170, A/160, A/161 extreme right, A/169, 337 B 22.
The general layout is given in plan in A/159 left which shows a set of three follower arms
on fixed pivots, and partial cam profiles. The pivot (I) for the sector axes follower (7

W ) is

shown at ten-to-twelve, the warning axes follower pivot (K) at five-past-twelve, and the
figure wheel axes follower pivot (1H ) at twenty-five-to with follower 6J . Except for a
rotational offset of the cams, which staggers the timing, the layout is identical for odd and
even motions and A/159 shows only one set cams and followers i.e. the arrangement is
duplicated for the alternate set but is not shown. Followers for the omitted cams use the
same pivot shafts. A/170 is a clearer version showing, in one view on the right, the full cam

158

7 Drive

profiles for the even difference
sector axes cam pair (27A, 28A) and
followers, with the arrangement for
the other two motions (figure wheel
axes, warning axes) shown
separately on the left. The view on
the right corresponds to the plan
Fig. 7.13: Miscellaneous loose cams.

view of the uppermost two cams in
the stack (see cam list, p. 160).

It is not immediately clear whether the layout shown on A/159 left is intended to represent
the odd or even cams or whether this view is intended to serve for both. One way of
resolving this would be to establish the top-to-bottom sequence of cams. However, the
convention of using dotted lines to indicate hidden edges is not strictly adhered to and
differentiating the planes of the followers to establish how they are layered is not obvious.

W 1, 7W 2 and 6J2, 6J1 A/159 left),

The sector and figure wheel followers (7

for example, are in different planes but are both drawn with unbroken lines and
superimposed. There are other signs of draughting inconsistencies: the two arms of the
same figure wheel followers are shown in the
same plane in A/159 lower left, and in different
planes in A/170 where drafting conventions are
more closely observed.
The circular-motion cam followers (upper cam
cluster) use rollers throughout, unlike the vertical
motion cam followers which have sliding contact
followers (vertical motion sector followers are an
exception, see Cams and Followers, p. 170). In
the case of the sector and figure wheel followers
(7

W 1, 7W 2 and 6J2, 6J1 A/159 left) the links are

driven by a simple extension of the follower arms,
(B 4F, A/159). In the case of the warning
followers (3Z 1, 3Z2 A/159) the drive link (4J) is
driven by an additional arm (3Z 3) integral with
the follower arm. Unlike the vertical motion
followers, where the follower arms for a cam pair
and the associated bar lever are vertically
staggered on the pivot shaft, the arms for the
circular motion followers and the drive to the link

159

Fig. 7.14: Cam stack, oblique rear view.

7 Drive

are in the same horizontal plane (A/160). For both types of circular motion followers (i.e.
with and without the additional arm) the two rollers of a follower set span the axial
distance separating the two cams (A/160 shows this though identifying parts of the same
assembly from this crowded drawing takes some hard peering. See rollers 3F, 9F
associated with drive link 6J, A/160 top right). The drive links have slotted forked ends
which take pivots for the links to the rack assemblies (e.g. 6J, A/160 top right).
The three lowermost cam pairs of the upper twelve cams in the stack generate the odd
axes motions, and the uppermost three cam pairs generate the even axes motions.
The numbering of the cams in the cam stack (A/163) is problematic. Twenty-eight cams are
drawn with numbering starting at 1A at the bottom and ending at 28A at the top. So far so
good. However, there are two anomalies: the cam between 19A and 20A has no identifier.

Also, for the numbering sequence from the lowermost cam (1A) is to be continuous
then the first cam in the upper stack, identified as 18A (A/163), should instead be 17A.
The number sequence has been corrected below for consistency and removal of ambiguity
and the new numbering has been used to identify cams in the construction drawings. The
new numbers are those physically stamped on the cams.

Cam
#

ID in
A/163

28

28A

Even sector drive arm – restore figure wheel valuer

27

27A

Even sector drive arm – return

26

26A

Even figure wheel drive arm – giving-off (reduce to zero)

25

25A

Even figure wheel drive arm – return

24

24A

Even warning axis – reset

23

23A

Even warning axis – return

22

22A

Odd warning axis – return

21

21A

Odd warning axis – reset

20

Circular Motion Cams
Description of Function

Odd figure wheel drive arm – return

19

20A

Odd figure wheel drive giving-off (reduce to zero)

18

19A

Odd sector drive arm – return

17

18A

Odd sector drive arm – restore figure wheel value

160

7 Drive

The spacing between circular motion cams (upper cluster) of a conjugate pair is wider than
for the vertical motion cams. The figure and warning axes cams, 20A through 26A, are a
standard 1.25" apart; the separation of the sector axes cams, 18A, 19A and 27A, 28A, is 0.75"
(A/160, A/163). So the two outermost pairs of circular motion cams (18A, 19A and 27A, 28A)
are more closely spaced than the four pairs between them. The wider spacing of the figure
and warning axes cams allows the forked ends of the extension arms to pass between the
cams. This is shown clearly on A/170 left where the drive arm (3Z 3) and drive link (4J
A/159) for the even difference warning axes is shown passing between the cams. In the
case of the sector drive arms, the drive-link pivot is outside the largest cam diameter
(A/170 right) which allows closer spacing.
Each figure wheel (n2Δ2, A/171) has four decades of numerals 0-9 i.e. 40 teeth with each
decade occupying one quadrant of a full circle. The maximum rotation of a figure wheel is
81 i.e. 9 increments of 9 representing a ten-digit interval (A/171). The internal drive lug
of each figure wheel occupies the remaining 9 (one-digit) sector. The circular motion of
the figure wheel axes consists of a fixed sweep to rotate the drive arm (n2E2, A/171) from
the home position to the zero-stop (S2) during giving-off. This is followed by a vertical lift
to disengage from the internal lug and return to home while the number given off is
restored by the sectors. The width of the internal lugs is kept sufficiently small to prevent
the drive arm interfering with the lugs when the arm is next lowered after the return-tohome stroke.
The sector restoring arms execute a similar pattern of circular sweeps. In the fully lowered
position the sector wheels engage the two adjacent figure wheel columns and giving-off
right to left takes place (A/171). The maximum angular displacement of a sector wheel
occurs if a ‘9’ is given off. In this case the sector is moved through 81 from the zero-stop
position. However, the rest position of the restoring arm is shown 84 from the zero-stop
position (A/171). The 3 margin prevents the lug and the arm interfering by ensuring that
the arm is well clear of the worst-case angular displacement of the internal lug. The ‘81’
inscribed in the circle representing the sector axis (1R2, A/171) refers to the maximum
displacement of a sector wheel and not the sweep of the restoring arm. The 3 clearance
for the restoring arm accounts for the slight difference in length of the sector and figure
wheel follower arms in A/159 though the cam throws are identical. The distance from the
pivot (1H) to the forked end of the figure wheel follower arm (6J1) is 9.0". This is extended

W 2, A/159). This gives a 0.1" longer stroke to the

to 9.3125" for the sector follower arm (7

sector rack which corresponds to about 3 safety clearance for the sector restoring home
position.

161

7 Drive

Dispensing with Seventh Difference Carry and Warning Axes
The main elevation of the Engine shows eight figure wheel axes – seven differences axes
(2Δ1 through 2Δ7), and the tabular axis, 2T (A/163, Fig. 2.3). Plan A/164 confirms that each
of the eight figure wheel axes have carry axes (consisting of helical carry arms) and warning
axes i.e. there are eight carry axes shown (1C 0 through 1C 7) and eight warning axes
(3W 0 through 3W 7 (A/163, A/164). It is clear from A/164 and A/161 that the seventh
difference figure wheel axis (2Δ7) is provided with a carry axis (1C 7) and a warning axis
(3W 7) in exactly the same arrangement as the other figure wheel axes. However, there is
no circumstance in which the seventh difference warning and carry axes operate.
Excluding faults, the value of on any given figure wheel can only be changed by any of three
distinct actions: by hand during setting initial conditions when the wheels are unlocked and
free to turn; during the giving-off phase of addition from a figure wheel in a column to the
immediate right (with the Engine viewed from front as in A/163); or during the carriage of
tens when a carry lever increments the figure wheel following the wheel immediately
below exceeding 9. The carry and warning axes play no part in the manual setting of initial
values, and since there is no figure wheel axis to the right of the last figure wheel axis
(2Δ7), the last figure wheel axis is never added to. Both the warning axis and carry axis for
the seventh difference column are therefore redundant and were omitted.
With a full complement of eight warning axes, as in the original design, there would be two
sets of four short rack-sections to drive circular motions for the eight warning axes – one
set of four for the odd warning axes and one set of four for the evens. Dispensing with the
carry mechanism for the seventh difference axis removes the need for a rack and sector
gear for the seventh difference warning axis. These were omitted and the backing bar for
the odd warning axes has three racks instead of the four originally specified.
Because of the introduction of mirroring of alternate columns (Design Error, p. 38; 3.6
Resolution of the Layout Design Error, p. 47) the direction of the active strokes and return
strokes are reversed for the odd and even axes. For example, even sector restore stroke
(A/170 left) occurs when the link drives from right to left. In the mirrored arrangement,
the odd sector restore stroke is from left to right. Modifications were made to achieve this.
Cam Profiles
The geometry of the cam profiles was generated working backwards from the known
requirements for the circular motions. The overall shapes were then confirmed against

162

7 Drive

A/159 and A/170 by visual inspection rather than exact tracing and matching. The timing
windows for the circular motions of the figure wheel, sector and warning axes were all
shortened slightly to ease the timing of the locking actions, and the detail of the original
shapes was therefore in any event subject to minor alteration.
The even sector cams (27A, 28A, A/170) illustrate the general relationship between cam
shape and cycle timing. A/170 right shows the position of the cams at the end of the even
sector axes return stroke i.e. with the link at the right-hand extremity of travel and the
roller of cam 27A at the top of the rise. This corresponds to 66 into the cycle (see 337 B
31, 337 B 314B, bottom right, for cam profile specification). The even sectors do not rotate
for the next 294 as indicated by the long sections of constant radius on both even sector
cams. During this period the sectors undergo various vertical motions: they are lowered
from their fully raised positions into full engagement for giving-off odd-to-even and then
lifted into half-engagement for the restore stroke. Cam 28A then becomes the active cam
and drives the sectors to the zero stops so completing the stroke that restores the number
given off to the figure wheels. The end of the stroke occurs 354 into the cycle (Timing
Diagram 337 X 21 and 337 B 31 for cam profile). In the case of the circular motion cams the
timing diagram and the angular distribution of events round the cam correspond exactly. A
short dwell of 12 follows during which the sector axis is fully raised. This corresponds to
the sections of the cams where the profiles coincide (A/170 right view, bottom centre).
The dwell occupies the interval 354 to 6. The return stroke, which occupies the interval
6 to 66 follows, during which cam 27A is active.
Carry Axes Intermittent Circular Motion
Main Drawings:

A/165 bottom right.

Related Drawings: A/159, A/160, A/163.
The ripple-through or successive carriage of tens is performed by a helical arrangement of
thirty carry arms (1C11through 1C130, A/171) keyed to the carry shafts (1C n) (Fig. 3.18). In
the original design there are eight carry axes (1C 0 through 1C 7 A/163, A/164). As
described above, the carry and warning axes for the seventh difference axis are redundant
and were omitted, so in the built engine there are seven carry axes not eight i.e. three odd
difference carry axes and four even.
The odd and even carries occur in different half-cycles of the calculating cycle. Odd carries
occur between 35 and 50 units, even carries between 10 and 25 (Timing Diagram 337 X 21).
The odd difference carry axes are active during the second interval during which the even
carry axes rotate but are idling: the even difference carry axes are active in the first interval

163

7 Drive

while the odd carry axes idle. During the idling intervals the carry arms rotate but they are
not in the same horizontal plane as the carry levers and therefore take no action: all the
carry axes rotate together in the same intervals but the odd and even carry axes are active
in different halves of the calculating cycle.
The intermittent circular motions of the carry axes are generated by a separate drive
mechanism and not from cams in the main cam stack. The mechanism, of which gears 7

P

N are part, is shown in A/163 alongside the right hand vertical framing member
N2), and in detail in Fig. 4 (Plan) and Fig. 5 (End View) in A/165. The output of the

and 7

(3

arrangement is intermittent drive to the horizontal shaft (2B) and the carry axes 1C 0
through 1C 6 are driven by bevel gears 2S0 through 2S6 pinned to the horizontal shaft
(A/163).
The intermittent drive mechanism consists of a large

N (A/165 Fig. 5) with an incomplete set
of teeth in two runs and keyed to the main shaft (1A ), a
twin-toothed gear, 7P , piggy-backed on it, and a register
phasing gear 7

Phasing
gear

wheel, 2F, that drives the output shaft, 2B, from which
the carry axes derive their intermittent circular motions

Register
pinion

via bevel gears (A/163).
The twin-toothed gear, 7

P , is fixed proud of the plane of

Recess

N , and meshes with the single

the phasing gear, 7

Sprung
roller

impact tooth (on the register pinion), 2G (working points

5

u, 7u, Fig. (End View) A/165). The register pinion,
2G, is fixed to a register wheel, 2F, which has a circular
recess for a sprung detent roller. The sprung roller (6J ),
tubular spring casing (3S ), and register arms (4G1
, 4G2 ) are shown on to the top of A/160, centre
2

Fig. 7.15: Phasing gear.
Register
pinion

right. During the carry-axes idling periods the
recess and sprung detent roller hold the register
wheel in the correct position for remeshing with

Sprung
roller

the phasing gear at the start of the next carry.
There are two carry episodes in one full calculating
cycle, one for the odd axes and one for the even
(337 X 21). The continuous rotary motion of the
phasing gear, driven by the hand crank via the
ratchet drive and clutch, is converted into
intermittent rotary motion of the register wheel to

164

Fig. 7.16: Register pinion.

7 Drive

provide two episodes of carry-shaft rotation for each full calculating cycle. As described
above (p. 164) the odd and even carry axes all rotate together though only one set is active
during a given episode.

Fig. 5, A/165 lower right) shows the phasing gear (7N ) and pinion (2G)

End View (

positioned at the start of a carry. The two impact teeth engage and ensure correct meshing
of the drive teeth. The first set of twenty teeth on the phasing gear, drive the register pinion
full circle. The last tooth on the pinion is incomplete: it has an angular truncation to clear
the trailing tooth of the phasing gear so as to leave the register pinion in its idling (stationary)
position. The register pinion idles during the toothless portion of the phasing wheel’s
rotation and the second carry axis drive is initiated when impact teeth next mesh. Each carry
occupies 104° of a 360° cycle and is followed by a 76° idling period between carries (337 X
21).
The function of the impact teeth is to provide correct meshing of the phasing gear with the
register wheel when they engage. That the phasing gear and the twin-toothed gear are
made as separate parts allows the twin-toothed gear to be made using materials tough and
durable enough to withstand repeated impact. The phasing gear and register wheel are
cast; the impact tooth and twin-tooth drive are machined from high-grade (EN16M) steel.
The twin-toothed drive is fixed to the phasing gear at only at two positions near the rim of
the phasing gear and its cylindrical centre stands clear of the phasing wheel boss. The
effect is to provide a form of shock absorption through the spring action along the length of
twin-toothed gear (A/165).
The impact tooth and twin-toothed gear are shown fixed with screws though no further

Fig. 5, A/165). To spare the threads of the fixing screws repeated

details are given (

impact, the fixing holes were fitted with impact sleeves which have the action of doweling
the impact tooth and the twin tooth drive to their respective host wheels. The sleeves are
fixed with cheese head screws. The impact sleeves (337 D 398), were added during
construction and were not included in the initial specification.

N is driven continuously by the drive shaft, 7V
(A163 and Fig. 4, A/165). Drive shaft 7V is hollow and acts as a sleeve for the main drive
shaft 1A which passes through it (Fig. 4, A/165) to a journal bearing in the left framing
piece (A/163). The drive train is 7M 7V 7N 2F 2B 2Sn with Intermittency provided by
the phasing gear 7N .
During a calculation the phasing gear 7

165

7 Drive

In the original design (i.e. without mirroring alternate axes) the circular motion of all the

Fig. 7.17: Circular motion bevel gear drive for mirrored carry axes.

carry axes is
unidirectional and
anticlockwise as drawn in
A/171. In the mirrored
arrangement in which the
odd difference axes are
opposite-handed (337 X
26), the odd and even
carry axes rotate in
opposite directions with
even carry axes rotating
anticlockwise as in the
original design, and odd
carry axes rotating
clockwise. Reversing the
direction of rotation of
alternate axes is
accomplished by reversing
the handing of alternate
axes bevel-gears i.e.
instead of all seven bevel
gears facing the same way
and evenly spaced, they
are clustered in oppositehanded back-to-back pairs
(Fig. 7.17).

Fig. 7.18: Back-to-back helical carry axes (rear view).

166

7 Drive

The largest single source of jams was found to be the register wheel losing synchronisation
with the phasing gear when operating the Engine too fast i.e. the register wheel overrunning
the detent which prevents the phasing wheel remeshing correctly when meshing is next
required. The sprung roller overrunning the recess in the register wheel turned out to the
determining factor in the upper limit of operable speed. Most of the jams that result from
small over-throws of this kind are not damaging and are simply and quickly resolved (User
Manual (2013), Phasing Gear Jams, p. 108-9). The detent over-throws do not always cause
jams but the register pinion losing synchronisation puts the carry arms out of phase and this
can cause carry lever fractures from conflict with the carry arms or, in the event of no
conflict, cause carriage errors because of out of order polling.
Phasing Gear Keyway
The line through the centre of the phasing gear and the mid-point of the keyway deviates

Fig. 5, A/165).

by 1° from the line bisecting the angle between the lower pair of webs (
Whether or not this is significant requires some decoding.

Working from the register wheel, the orientation of the twinned-tooth drive is determined
by the geometry of the impact teeth and the correct phasing of the circular motion drive to
shaft 2B. The twin-toothed drive needs a web to fix to for support. This fixes the
orientation of the webs and therefore of the phasing gear.

V (Fig. 5, A/165) but there is no clear indication in
V . This

The phasing gear is shown keyed to 7

A/163 as to how the bevel gear 7M is fixed at the crank end of the drive sleeve 7

uncertainty is shared in A/159 (end view, bottom left in red, Fig. 7.7) where the position of
the key for the clutch rocker is shown directly opposite the extended lug, but no fixing is
shown for the bevel gear (A/159 plan, top centre left, in red). So it appears that the bevel
and phasing gears need to be keyed because they cannot be pinned through the sleeve,
that the bevel gear keyway is in line with the clutch rocker keyway (this is assumed on the
basis that if the position of the bevel gear keyway was other than arbitrary, it would have
been positively specified) and that, given the additional trouble of machining a keyway with
an offset, the keyways should be in line for convenience of manufacture. Working back
from the clutch and drive bevel in this way fixes the position of the keyway for the phasing
gear.
A discrepancy of as little as 1° suggests the possibility of an error. It is also the case that in
many of the drawings gear teeth are referenced from the flank of the tooth rather than
from the centre of the tooth, or from the centre of the inter-tooth gap. The centre line
through the keyway closely coincides with the line taken from the flank of the tooth

167

7 Drive

opposite. This raises further doubts about how deliberate the 1 difference is. However,
since the position of the phasing gear keyway, and the orientation of the phasing gear, can
be determined independently there is no reason why the centre line of the keyway should
coincide with the line bisecting the lower two webs and there is no reason in principle why
the discrepancy could not have been something more substantial and thus less
questionable. Had the deviation from the centre-line been greater the question of there
being an error would most likely not have arisen.
If the keyway in the phasing gear were machined to preserve symmetry i.e. so that the
centre-line through the keyway bisected the angle of the two lower webs, this would
amount to ignoring the 1 offset. The implications of this would be to retard the carry
timing which brings the end of the carry part of the cycle critically close to the point at
which the locks come in. The 1 offset of the keyway was kept to on the grounds that the
offset was deliberate and dictated by timing needs.

7.4 Vertical Motions
Repeated addition required for tabulation using finite differences requires vertical motions
of the locks, figure wheel, sector and warning axes (see 3. Calculation). These motions are
derived from the eight pairs of conjugate cams, 1A through 16A, in the lower section of the
cam stack (A/163).
Cam followers operate four pairs of horizontal bars in the section of the Engine below the
eight figure wheel axes. Three pairs of bars are slung on the underside i.e. at a level just

B , A/163) of the cam stack, and one pair (24E , 23E) at a
level just below the middle framing plate (6D A/163). (Only one of the six horizontal bars
below the lower framing plate (5

of the lower set is shown in A/163 (12A). 23E is obscured by 24E). The arrangement of
cams and cam followers converts the continuous rotary motion of the cams into
intermittent linear reciprocating motion of the horizontal bars. The reciprocating motion
of the horizontal bars is converted to vertical motion by bell crank levers (A/163, detail
A/160, A/177, Fig. 7.1). These lift and lower the axes and locks. The overall arrangement
produces four sets of intermittent vertical motions for locks, figure wheel, sector and
warning axes, phased according to the timing diagram (337 X 21).
Main Drawings:

A/159 (right), A/160, A/163, A/168, A/177.

Related Drawings:

A/161, A/167, A/169, 337 E.

168

7 Drive

Cams and Followers
The vertical motion cams are the eight pairs of closely spaced cams in the lower section of
the cam stack. The cams were renumbered 1 through 16 with 1 the lowermost cam and 16
the topmost. In this case (unlike for the circular motion cams) the numbering corresponds
to the notational identifiers for cams 1A through 16A in A/160 and by implication in A/163
(E21). Each cam is physically stamped with its identifying number.
Cam
#

ID in
A/159

16

16A

Even warning axis lower

15

15A

Even warning axis lift

14

14A

Odd warning axis lower

13

13A

Odd warning axis lift

12

12A

Even sector axis lift

11

11A

Even sector axis lower

10

10A

Odd sector axis lift

9

9A

Odd sector axis lower

8

8A

Odd figure wheel column unlock

7

7A

Odd figure wheel column lock

6

6A

Even figure wheel column lock

5

5A

Even figure wheel column unlock

4

4A

Even figure wheel axis lift

3

3A

Even figure wheel axis lower

2

2A

Odd figure wheel axis lower

1

1A

Odd figure wheel axis lift

Vertical Motion Cams
Description of Function

Eight pairs of cam followers rock on eight separate pivots and are driven by the irregular
shapes of the cams (A/159 right shows all 16 cam followers and the pivot layout; A/168 and
A/169 show clearer partial views). Bar levers, integral with the cam follower bosses, slot
into the horizontal bars (A/159 right). Six of the follower pivots project through the lower

B , A/163) of the cam stack to enable the bar levers to engage with the

framing plate (5

drive slots of the horizontal bars.

169

7 Drive

The levers operating each of the eight horizontal bars are driven by two cam followers on
the same boss (A/168). Each of the cam follower arms is driven by a separate cam. Cams
therefore occur in conjugate or complementary pairs with one pair of cams associated with
each of the eight vertical motions. The purpose of the complementary cam arrangement is
to provide positive drive for the vertical motions in both directions. The motion of a camfollower boss is determined by the outside surface of the active cam of the pair and the
rises acting on the leading and trailing arms dictate these motions. The leading arm
provides drive in one direction, and the trailing arm, driven by the mating cam, provides
the return motion. The naming convention adopted is that the leading arms point in the
clockwise direction as viewed from above (the cams rotate anticlockwise so viewed). The
leading arm does not necessarily make contact with the active cam first. At any given time
only one of the pair of cam followers is in direct contact with the cam. The other follower
has clearance from the cam surface.
The rotation of the cams viewed from above is anticlockwise (in A/168 and physically).
With the numbering indicated, the odd-numbered cams engage trailing levers and the
even-numbered cams engage leading levers. The trailing levers are therefore below the
leading levers on the follower pivots.
The overall layout of the vertical motion cams and followers is shown in plan view in A/159
right with additional partial views in A/168 left and right. A/159 right gives partial cam
profiles with all significant rises shown in local relation to the active portion of the cam
follower i.e. the cam profile of the whole cam is not shown, only illustrative sections. The
eight follower pivots are shown distributed around the cam stack on a fixed diameter pitch
circle. The cams are shown with standard outside diameters and the rises and falls deviate
inwards from this diameter.
In six of the eight cases the contact between the cam follower and the cam circumference
is shown as a sliding contact (A/159 right). Only in the remaining two cases are the cam
followers shown with a roller on one of the two arms, and a sliding follower as the other.
Roller-cum-slider followers are provided for odd and even sector motions only. This is
shown on A/159 right, and the spaghetti junction of intersecting followers with rollers in
A/159 is partially clarified in A/168. A/159 right is cluttered and the multiple overlays
make the trains difficult to isolate. The train for the even difference sector vertical motions
is roller 9E at just past nine o’clock, 6H2 6K1 6E 6K2 driving horizontal bar 24E. The train for
the odd difference sector is 9E 5I2 5 I 5J2 driving horizontal bar 23E.

In all cases (i.e. sliders and rollers) leading arm rises are shown as straight and trailing arm
rises as are shown curved on a 2.5" radius. The straight plane surfaces of the leading

170

7 Drive

sliding arms are shown near-parallel to the rises on the cams (see for example the even
warning follower 2V2, A/159 right top). In the case of the trailing arm rises, the shape of
the inside of the arm roughly matches the curve of the rise (see even figure wheel follower
8

N1, A/159 lower right). It seems that Babbage was concerned to avoid point loading and

so distributed the load over a contact surface. The trailing arm rises are radiused to avoid
fouling: if the trailing rise were straight, the top corner of the rise would foul the inner
surface of the arm with the worst case occurring about half way through the rise.
In all cases of sliding followers the distance from the centre of the cam follower pivot to
the line of contact on the sliding arm is shown as 3.5". In the case of the roller followers
the 3.5" is taken from the pivot centre to the centre of the roller rather than to the line of
contact. In the case of sliding contacts, the line through the pivot centre and the point of
contact is in each case tangential to the outside diameter of the cam i.e. with the follower
at the top of a rise. The effective angle between the follower arms on the same boss is
therefore constant. In the case of the two roller-cum-slider followers the line through the
point of contact of the roller and the pivot centre is tangential. Here the effective angle
between the follower arms differs from that of arms with sliders only.
It is not immediately obvious why rollers were preferred for the sector vertical motions.
The sector wheels represent the largest deadweight to be lifted, while the locks, though
lighter, represent the largest shock load to the drive. It is possible that Babbage sought to
reduce wear by using a roller on what he considered to be the most demanding load. This
view is supported by the fact that in the case of the circular motions, rollers are preferred
on all the cam followers, and sliding contactors are avoided entirely. Though the loads for
the circular motions are lighter, the duration of the actions tend to be more sustained. The
rises on the cams are therefore longer and the period of active sliding contact, and
therefore of wear, is correspondingly greater. It is possible that Babbage preferred rollers
to sliders wherever possible. However, rollers are less space efficient: they require greater
separation between the cams than do sliders and a lower stacking density of the cams
would be required to accommodate them. The compressed space of the lower cam stack
assembly as drawn prohibits the general use of rollers. However, the tight pitch of the cam
spacing is relaxed in the case of the sector cam-followers because they require a free
vertical motion to disengage during setting up (setting up procedures are described in User
Manual (2013), Setting Initial Values, pp. 26-35). It is possible that Babbage exploited this
additional space to provide rollers where he could – one for each of the sector followers.
An alternative to the general use of sliders would have been to reduce the overall stacking
density of the circular motion cams and expand the lower section of the cam stack.
Without an additional stage of linking this would increase the overall height of the machine

171

7 Drive

and the knock-on effect would be to put the upper figure wheels out of normal reach. It
seems that Babbage preferred sliders to an overall increase in cam stack height.
Cross-over Bar Levers
There are three instances in which the bar levers which drive horizontal bars need to cross

K , A/159) driving horizontal bar 13A for the

over bars in the same plane. The bar lever (7

odd locks crosses horizontal bar 12A which drives the evens locks; even difference warning
bar lever (2U) crosses horizontal bar 5D which drives the odd difference warnings; and
even figure wheel drive lever (8M, A/159) crosses horizontal bar 12A which drives the even
locks. The bars for these three motions have raised projections with slots for the bar levers
as shown at the right end of the even sector bar 24E on A/163. Raising the drive slots
allows the bar levers to clear the intervening bars and provide drive to the otherwise
obstructed bars.
The lower cam stack framing plate (E) is drawn ½" thick (A/160) but is labelled as 1" thick.
If the upper surface of the framing plate is taken as the reference and the plate thickened
downwards there would be insufficient space for the slotted projections on the horizontal
bars (337 E 324, E 342, E 334). This was resolved by following the vertical layout
arrangement on A/163 which is drawn with the plate thickened and with sufficient
clearance for the bars (only 24E is shown in A/163).
Specifying the Cams
Specifying the cam detail was a demanding task comparable in difficulty only to aspects of
the printer design. Unlike the circular motions, which are intermittent but smooth, vertical
motions are stepped i.e. lifting and lowering by fixed distances. The figure wheel axes,
sector wheels, warning axes and locks are lifted and lowered by single fixed distances; the
sector axes have a two-step motion with separate steps for partial and full engagement.
Several separate features of the vertical motion cams need specifying: the outside
diameter of the cam blanks from which to manufacture the cams; the height of the rises
and falls to provide the required travel of the driven motions produced; the dwell to
sustain the motion for the appropriate duration; the timing of each motion to produce the
correct start, duration and succession of the motions for each cam of a pair and to ensure
that the motions from the cam pairs are correctly phased in relation to each other.

172

7 Drive

Height of the Cam Rises
The heights of the cam rises are specified by working back from the required vertical
motions via the drive train to the cams. The travel of the vertical motions of the warning
axes, figure wheel axes and sector axes are given in A/171 where the length of travel is
inscribed inside the circles representing the shafts: vertical motion of figure wheel axis
(2Δ1) is given as 0.3", of the warning axis (3W 1) is given as 0.34", and that of the sector
axis (1R2 ) 0.68" (for full engagement with odd and even figure wheels) and 0.34" (for
partial engagement while the figure wheels are restored). The significance of these figures
is confirmed by the timing diagram (F/385/1; Fig. 3.2, p.21) where these figures are
reproduced alongside the arrows indicating the vertical motions.
The vertical travel required was multiplied by the ratio of the length of the arms of the bell
crank levers to give the translational travel of the horizontal bars. The bar motion was then
multiplied by the ratio of the length of the bar lever to the length of the follower arms to
give the height of the rise (337 E 372 A, E 371 A for example). These calculated rises were
then checked against the rises shown in A/159 and A/168. There were no significant
corrections required.
Where the size of the required vertical motions is given explicitly as for the warning, figure
wheel and sector wheel axes, this information was taken as the starting point of the
calculation working back through the drive train to determine the cam rises. However, the
vertical travel of the locks is not specified in the original drawings (e.g. A/160). The length
of travel of the locks was derived from the depth of the figure wheel teeth and the gradient
of the angled sliding bearing in the upper and lower bearing plates that support the locks.
As before this figure was worked back through the drive train to determine the cam rise
and then checked against the cam profiles shown in A/169 (right) and the less clear view on
A/159 (bottom centre). Again, there were no significant corrections required to the height
of the lock rises though small adjustments were required to the dwell (see below).
Cam Diameter
The cams are shown with a standard outside diameter from which the outer shape deviates
inwards by the height of the rises and falls (A/159, A/169). The outer radius of the cams
was taken as 6.46". This figure was calculated by triangulation and confirmed by scaling
from A/159. The pitch circle radius of the cam pivots is 7.35" and the length of the cam
follower arms is 3.50". In the case of the sliding followers the follower arms are shown
tangential to the outer cam circumference i.e. at the top of the rise. The odd warning
follower (6T1 , 6T2 , A/159 top centre) provides one of the less cluttered examples. Here,

173

7 Drive

as for the other sliding followers, the line joining the point of contact and the centre of the
pivot (6D) is at right angles to the cam radius through the point of contact. In the case of
the roller-cum-slider followers the same holds true i.e. the line through the point of contact
of the roller and pivot centre is tangential to the outer cam circumference. The cam outer
radius of 6.46" is calculated as the third side of the right-angled triangle formed by the
radius of the pivot pitch circle (7.35"), the follower arm (3.50") and the cam radius. Scaling
from A/159 confirms that this figure was taken as standard for all the vertical motion cams
and the figure of 6.46" was used to specify the maximum outer diameter of the vertical
motion cam blanks (337 E 391 C).
Design Alternatives
The locus of the point of contact is an arc with radius equal to the effective length of the
follower arm. In the case of non-conjugate cam pairs it is usual to specify the rises as
bilateral deviations from a mean circumference rather than inward deviations from a
standard outside dimension as Babbage has done. Using bilateral deviations from a mean
circumference has the advantage of minimising the amount by which the arc needs to be
taken into account in determining the actual angular position of the point of contact at the
extremities of travel (i.e. the bottom and top of the rises). However, using deviations from
a mean has the disadvantage of greatly complicating the specification. If mean
circumferences were used in the case of conjugate pairs, the outside diameters of the cam
pairs would differ. While there is no great penalty in this for manufacture, the loss of
standardisation has a knock-on effect that introduces variations each of which would need
to be catered for separately. For example, if the pivot centres are retained on a fixed
diameter pitch circle, as Babbage shows, and the cam diameters varied, then the cam
followers cease to be standard components: the lengths and angles of contact will vary
from cam to cam and each cam pair would require additional calculation to specify its
followers and ensure correct timing. Non-standard followers have the additional drawback
of more expensive and troublesome manufacture. Another possibility would have been to
abandon the fixed pitch circle for the pivot centres. In this case the radial distance of the
pivot centres from the cam shaft centre would differ. To retain tangential contact would
again require non-standard follower arms. To disregard tangential contact would entail
having to again take into account, in each individual case, the effects on timing of the arc
traversed by the swing of the follower arms.
Babbage appears to have standardised the layout to simplify an already complex
arrangement. Adopting a standard outside diameter for the cams, a fixed pitch circle for
the follower pivots, fixed follower arm lengths and tangential contact to the outer
circumference, eliminates the need to cater for variant combinations of pivot position,

174

7 Drive

contact angle, and arm length. These provisions significantly reduce calculation and
simplify layout, manufacture and, moreover, reduce the risk of drafting and layout errors in
attempting to keep account of variations. One example of the benefits of a standardised
geometry arises in the determination of the cam keyways the positions of which are critical
in ensuring the correct phasing of the various motions derived from the eight pairs of
mating cams. With a fixed pivot pitch circle, standard follower arm lengths and standard
outside cam diameters, the angular offset between contact points of leading and trailing
arms can be taken as a standard 56. This fixed offset between mating cams substantially
simplifies the specification of the keyway positions for the full set of cams (see sample
calculation, Keyway Offset – Example, p. 190).
Cam Follower Pivots
The eight follower pivots are shown distributed around the circumference of a fixed pitch
circle in A/159. Though fixed, the exact size of the pitch circle is not given though it was
assumed that Babbage would have chosen a convenient round dimension. Measuring the
distance between the centre of the cam shaft and the centres of the cam follower pivots on
A/159 was not exact enough to recover the pitch circle radius with sufficient precision for
manufacture and this radius was found through a combination of scaling and calculation.
The X-Y co-ordinates of each of the pivot centres was measured referenced to the rightangled axes through the cam shaft centre. The radial distance from the cam shaft centre
was then calculated as the hypotenuse of the triangle in each case and the list inspected
for a convenient round number. The X-Y coordinates of the even warning pivot (2D), for
example, were measured at 4.50" and 513/16" which gives 7.35086" for the radial distance.
The figure of 7.35" was the number closest to a round number for the eight calculations
and this was adopted as the pitch circle radius. Each of the pivot centres was then
specified as the intersection of two loci – the pitch circle radius, and a coordinate referred
to either of the right-angled lines through the cam shaft centre.
Lifting and Lowering
The lifting and lowering action for the figure wheel axes, warning axes, and locks is
provided by bell crank levers which are slotted into the horizontal bars below. The sector
axes bell cranks are operated by horizontal bars, 23E, 24E (A/160) from above.
The bell cranks for the figure wheel axes, warning axes and sector axes have forked ends
that fit into bobbins pinned to the lower end of the axes (Figs. 7.19, 7.20, A/160 lower left,
A/163). The fork and bobbin arrangement allows independent vertical and circular motion
to be imparted to the axes without conflict: the axes are lifted by the forked crank in the

175

7 Drive

Figure
wheel
lock

Sector
axis

Figure
wheel
axis
Warning
axis

Fig. 7.19: Bell cranks for axes and figure wheel locks (A/160) (detail) (colour added).

Lock

Sector
axis

Figure
wheel Warning
axis
axis

Fig. 7.20: Bell cranks for locks, sector, figure wheel, and warning axes (view from front of Engine).

176

7 Drive

bobbin and rotated in the fork by the racked drive (see Lifting and Lowering, p. 175).
The basic action of the bell crank and horizontal bar is clearly shown for the figure wheel
axis bearing the tabular result (left-most axis A/163, Fig. 7.19, A/160 detail). The lower end
of the axes project below the bobbin through a bearing hole in a plate fixed across the
underside of the front and rear framing members (A/160 lower left).
The eight horizontal bars are (A/160 elevation left bottom right, A/159 plan view):

Horiz
Bar

Function

10

G

Even difference figure wheel axis lift

G

Odd difference figure wheel axis lift

7

12

A

Even difference locks lift

13

A

Odd difference locks lift

4

D

Even difference warning axis lift

5

D

Odd difference warning axis lift

23

E

24

E

Odd difference sector axis lift
Even difference sector axis lift

The bell cranks (pink in Fig. 7.19) for the sector axes are operated from above (A/160)
(A/163 shows the even sector bar 24E but not the bell cranks). The connection between
the sector horizontal bars (23E, 24E) and the sector bell cranks is shown as a mix of pivots
and slots: A/163 shows the even sector bar (24E) with a pivot for the first and last bell
cranks, and with slots for the two intermediate cranks. A/160 confirms pivots for the last
even and last odd (23E) crank drive. The bell crank levers for the sector lifts (two of these
are shown in A/160 i.e. 5P2 and 5P21) share pivot shafts with the bell cranks for the figure
wheel axes and warning axes. So in A/160 5P2 (even sector drive lever) shares fixed pivot

H0 with even figure wheel axis (2T ) lift driven by horizontal bar 10G and bell crank 16Q2
16Q (short, blue in Fig. 7.19), as well as the with the crank for even warning axis
1
3
( W 0) driven by horizontal bar 4D, crank lever 7R20 and crank fork lever 7R10 acting on
bobbin 3

I 0 . (The warning axis bell crank Is not shown on A/160 but is shown in plan in

A/161. The notational identifiers were taken from A/160, A/161 and from A/178/2
Notational Trains).

177

7 Drive

The layout of the bell cranks is shown in plan view in A/177. The bell cranks for a figure
wheel axis, sector axis, and warning axis share a single shaft for each of the eight column
positions (A/160, A/177). (The warning axes bell cranks are in line with the figure wheel
bell cranks front-to-back and so are obscured in Fig. 7.19, A/160. The arrangement is made
clear in A/177). The bell crank shafts are located at each end in bearing holes in the
horizontal framing members spanning front-to-back. The longer of the forked bell crank
levers drive the sector axes; the shorter ones drive the figure wheel axes (middle) and
warning axes (rear) (A/177, Fig. 7.21). In relation to A/161 the crank pivots H0 through H7
act as shafts for three bell cranks separately driven and rotating independently on the
same shaft. So In A/160 5P2 and 16Q2 are not the same piece but are separate drive levers
separately driven by horizontal bars 24E and 10G respectively. The drive levers rotate
freely on pivot H0. They just happen to be aligned in the configuration shown in A/160.

Sector
axis

Warning
axis
Figure
wheel
axis

Figure
wheel
lock

Fig. 7.21: Bell cranks for locks, sector, figure wheel, and warning axes (view from rear of Engine).

The arrangement for the locks is slightly different. Each of the lock cranks has a separate
pivot shaft (Fig. 7.21, A/160, A/177). Unlike the axes, the locks do not rotate so a bobbin
drive is not called for. Instead the lifting and lowering action is transmitted by a connecting
rod (4X A/160) pivoted, at the top end, to the lower end of lock L, and to the bell crank arm
9

Y1 at the lower end (A/160 bottom left).

Disengaging the Sectors for Setting Up
The figure wheels are set to their initial values manually. To free the figure wheels for
setting up they must be disengaged from the sector wheels by raising the sector wheels
clear of engagement. The sectors are disengaged during setting up by operating the two
sector lifting handles (Fig. 7.22, A/163, A/177) that lift the sectors clear of the figure

178

7 Drive

wheels. Two lifting handles (5E 5 , 5E 6 A /163) raise the sector axes to disengage the two
wheel columns. The right handle disengages the even sector axes and the left handle the
odd sector axes. Lifting the right handle (5E 6) rotates a shaft to which the bell crank lever
for the sixth even sectors (5S n6) axis is pinned (A/177). This drives the even sector
horizontal bar to lift the remaining even sector axes. The same process is repeated for the
left handle (5E 5) to lift the odd sector (5S n5).
No provision is made on the original drawings for locking these in place to hold the sector
axes in their raised positions so as to relieve the operator of the load during setting up.
Two pull-out plungers (Fig. 7.23, F361A) were added to the front horizontal framing
member, F2, A/163. During normal operation the plungers are locked in their home
positions by bayonet locks.

Lifting
levers

Release
lever

Fig. 7.22: Lifting levers and release lever (view from front of Engine).

During setting up the plungers are pulled out by
Locking
plunger

hand after the levers have been lifted and provide
fixed resting support for the levers. Babbage would
perhaps have simply jammed the levers in their
raised positions.
There appears to be a dimensioning error in A/177.

Fig. 7.23: Locking plunger.

A small section of shaft is shown projecting from the
framing member to the lifting handle. The diameter of this shaft is drawn the same as the
diameter of the bell crank boss. A bearing hole in the framing of that size would present a
structural weakness. In addition, the outsized diameter of the boss for the lifting handle is
shown smaller on A/163 and on A/161. It was assumed that the shaft diameter on A/177

179

7 Drive

shown projecting from the framing member is an error. The final dimensions are shown on
337 E 394.
As well as disengaging the sector wheels from the figure wheels when setting up, it is also
necessary to disengage the sector horizontal bars 23E and 24E (A/163) to uncouple the
horizontal drive from the cam drive. This prevents the vertical motion drive from trying to
drive the now immobilised sector horizontal bar when the Engine is advanced during the
setting up cycle.
Details of the mechanism for disengagement are given in A/159 centre (in red), and A/168
top right (A/163 shows only the support bracket G on the cam stack side of the right 100
upright). The follower boss, cam follower
and drive lever for the horizontal bar for
each of the odd and even sector bars are an
integral assembly which is free to slide
Bar
levers

upwards on the cam follower pivots (5E, 6E
A/168, A/159). Operating the release lever
(2J ) raises the two sleeves through levers
2

D 2 and 2D 1 which lift the bar levers out

of their drive slots in the horizontal bars
(Fig. 7.24). Two V-notches for the releaselever spring hold the lever in the released

Release
lever

and unreleased positions.

Horizontal
bar

Fig. 7.24: Release lever (lowered).

Modifications
Support for Horizontal Bars
The six lower horizontal bars, which provide the vertical motions for the figure wheel axes,
warning axes and locks, span the full length (right to left) of the frame. The bars are
supported at each end by slotted supports fixed front to rear to the main frame uprights.
Five of the bars (12A 13A 10G 7G 5D, A/167) pass under the cam stack and these have an
additional support on the underside of the right-hand side of the cam stack. This slotted
support, fixed to the right-hand printer shaft bearing mount is shown in A/167, A/163, and
A/159 (faint blue pencil to the right in right view).
During assembly it was found that the full 62" span between the main uprights was too
long to avoid downward bowing of the horizontal bars. An additional intermediate support
was added for the six bars at the approximate midpoint of the span between the main

180

7 Drive

uprights. The extra support is identical to the two fixed across the end pieces.
There is very little separation between the horizontal bars for the even figure wheel bar
(10G A/167) and the bar for the odd difference lock (13A) and A/167 shows a thin tongue
separating the two bars. This was considered a weakness and, given the material
(phosphor bronze), difficult to manufacture. The thin tongue was omitted in all the bar
supports and single broader slots provided for the two bars. Separation was instead
provided by five phosphor bronze spacers fixed to and equally spaced along the length of
the odd lock bar. The original separation remains unchanged. The spacers are 5/8"
diameter and 0.082" thick (337 E 323).
Counterbalancing Axes and Locks
During assembly it was found that even with a 4:1 reduction in the drive the engine could
not be turned past the points in the cycle where the locks are released at 25 units. The
weight of the locks, friction in the angled slot-bearings, sideways pressure from the figure
wheels, and the abruptness of the motion, make releasing the locks the most demanding
load in the cycle. The 45 pressure angle on the lock cam (Fig. 7.25) presents a shock-load
to the drive which was too great to overcome with the original arrangement.
The solution adopted was to counterbalance the
weight of the locks using springs. The original
design (A/163) shows a single figure wheel axis
(2Δ1) projecting above the upper bearing plates
and passing through a spring to counterbalance
its weight. This single feature was assumed to
be generic and the technique was used to
counterbalance all figure wheel, sector wheel
and warning axes (Fig. 7.26). However,
counterbalancing the locks from above in the

Fig. 7.25: Figure-wheel-lock cam.

same way is more problematic. The locks are not
shown projecting above the upper bearing plates
and the shock load problem was encountered
after manufacture i.e. during the build. Extending
the locks would have meant remaking the locks
and modifying the bearing plates. An additional
difficulty is presented by the fact that the motion
of the locks has a sideways as well as vertical
component: the locks are lifted by the bell crank

181

Fig. 7.26: Axes counterbalancing springs.

7 Drive

levers and slide in angled bearing slots which give a sideways motion so as to withdraw
them from the figure wheels (L1, A/160 elevation; L0, L1, L7, A/161 plan). In addition, the
locking mechanism for the first column (seventh difference, extreme right) was modified to
immobilise the first column during a part of the cycle in which it is unsecured (see Modified
Seventh Difference Lock, p. 184). The correct operation of the modified mechanism relies
on the weight of the lock. If each lock was counterbalanced individually, this additional
lock would need to be excepted.
These considerations weighed against counterbalancing the locks using individual springs
acting on the upper bearing plates. Instead, a single spring-loaded assembly was devised
to act on the horizontal drive bars to counterbalance the locks via the bell cranks. This
relatively small assembly is visually discrete and for the most part passes unnoticed (337 E
22) (Fig. 6.28, p. 141).
The counterbalancing mechanism consists of a set of three springs placed end to end (Fig.
7.27). The springs are in compression and kept in axial alignment by a forked tie rod (337 E
411) threaded along its length and a threaded sleeve (337 E 419) passing through the
centre of the springs. The tie rod acts on a lever which is trapped in a recessed block (337 E
414) screwed to the side of the horizontal lock bar. The effect is to bias the bar to the left
i.e. in the direction of lift.
The compression force is
adjusted by turning the
threaded sleeve and
shortening or lengthening
the effective length of the
composite spring. There
are two identical
mechanisms housed in the
one assembly – one for
the odd axis locks and one
for the even axis locks.
The six springs are of the
same type used on the

Fig. 7.27: Figure wheel locks counter-balancing springs.

upper bearing plates to the counterbalance the figure wheel, sector wheel and warning
axes (Fig. 7.26).

182

7 Drive

Modification to the Sector Lift Horizontal Bars
The bars (23E, 24E) driving the sector bell cranks are shown supported only by the bell
crank levers (A/160). The bar for the first and last even axes (24E A/163) has pivot fixings
for the crank levers at each end, and the two intermediate cranks are shown with slot
drives. The arrangement is assumed to be repeated for the odd sector bar (23E) (masked
in A/163 by 24E). As drawn, the sector bars would ride in a slight arc determined by the
length of the bell crank arm, and the intention seems to be that the intermediate cranks
would lose the vertical component of motion in the slots. This arrangement gave rise to
two concerns. The effective length of the crank with the slotted drives is shorter than that
of the pivoted cranks, and the vertical motions imparted to the first and last sector axes
would therefore differ slightly from those imparted to the intermediate sector axes.
Deepening the slots to equalise the lever lengths would weaken the bar and would risk
fouling the slots at the extremities of the travel. A further concern was the risk of vertical
bowing due to the upthrust from the bell cranks in response to the loads being lifted.
The sector bars and associated bell cranks were modified. The extreme left-hand pivot
connection between the bell crank and the bar was retained as shown in the original. All
other slot drives, including the two closest to the cam stack (odd and even sector bars),
were replaced with pivots and slightly (vertically) elongated holes in the bars (337 E 343, E
344). With this arrangement, the vertical component of motion imparted by the arc of the
bell crank lever tends to diminish over the length of the bar. Elongating the holes in the
bars avoids any contention that might arise from small differences in the lengths of the
levers, and the use of pivots in preference to slots avoids the risk of disengagement from
upward bowing.
An additional mechanism was provided to control the operation of the lock for the first odd
figure wheel axis i.e. the right-most figure wheel lock that is closest to the cam stack (see
below ‘Modified Seventh Difference Lock’, p. 183). An advantage of replacing the righthand fixed pivots with elongated pivots is that the downward motion imparted to the even
sector bar by the additional lock mechanism (337 E 22) does not conflict with the upward
arc that would otherwise be imparted by the bell crank.
An additional slotted support was fixed to the right-hand uprights to provide front-to-rear
support for the sector bar close to the cam follower. The purpose of this modification was
to spare the bell cranks taking any side thrust from the cam follower lever acting in the
profiled slot at the end of the sector bar, and also to reduce the risk of disengagement
during normal operation.

183

7 Drive

Modification to Horizontal Bar for Warning Axis Drive
The modification of the axes layout for mirroring (see Design Error, p. 38, p. 47) only
affects the position of the carry axes, so the layout of A/177 is unaffected except for the

W 7, top right A/177) which was omitted.

bell crank for the seventh odd warning axis (3

The slot in the horizontal bar for the bell crank drive for this warning axis was also omitted.
Modified Seventh Difference Lock
The original design goes to some lengths to ensure that the figure wheels do not derange,
mainly using locks to immobilise the figure wheels at appropriate stages in the cycle.
During the carry portion of the cycle the figure wheels need to be free to receive carries
and even here anti-deranging provision is made: figure wheels are prevented from
deranging during the carry cycle by horns on the carry levers which hold the figure wheels
stationary in unwarned digit positions and, during the carry phase, advance the figure
wheels one position in warned positions. So the figure wheels are secured at different
times by locks and carry-lever horns, or by engagement with the sector wheels during
giving-off and restoring. Dispensing with the seventh difference carry and warning axes as
redundant leaves the seventh difference column unsecured during any interval during
which it would otherwise be engaged with the sector wheels i.e. it is unsecured whenever
not locked by the seventh difference lock. The seventh difference lock was modified by an
additional mechanism to secure the seventh odd difference figure wheels during these
unsecured intervals.
The only period in the first half cycle that the odd difference columns are secured by the
odd difference locks is between 70° and 110° i.e. between giving-off odds to evens (6° to
66°) during which the odd difference figure wheels are reduced to zero, and during
restoration (114° to 174°) of the number given off (Timing Diagram 337 X 21). For the
other two periods in the first half cycle the odd figure wheels are secured by engagement
with the odd difference sectors i.e. during giving-off and restoration. So there are no
unsecured intervals during the first half cycle and no additional precautions are called for.
In the second half-cycle (evens to odds addition), odd difference columns (all of them in the
original design including the seventh difference column) are secured by engagement with
the even sectors during giving-off (186° to 246°) and by the carry lever horns during the
carry phase (254° to 358°). However, there are no even sectors to the right of the seventh
difference column and no warning axis with carry levers to secure the seventh difference
column as the warning axis was dispensed with as redundant, and during these two
intervals, the seventh difference column is unsecured.

184

7 Drive

The modification to the seventh difference lock secures the seventh difference column
during these two intervals by locking the column for the whole of the second half cycle.
This does not affect the calculation in any way as the seventh difference column retains a
constant difference that is given off and restored during the first half cycle of each cycle
and since, uniquely of the odd differences, the seventh difference is never added to by an
eighth (even) difference, it can remain dormant through the whole of the second half cycle.
The bell crank for the
Lock

seventh odd difference
lock was modified to
accommodate a
collapsible link inserted
between the bell crank
for that lock and the
drive link to the
seventh difference

Operating
lever

lock. The odd
difference locks are
driven by horizontal
bar 13A as shown in

Collapsible
link

A/160 for odd lock 1L
driven by link 4X1 bell
crank 9Y11 9Y21 and by
horizontal bar 13A.
The collapsible link is

Locking
link

inserted at the pivot
between the bell crank
arm 9Y1 and 4X (the
appropriate notations
for this link in the
seventh differed lock
position are 9Y17 and
4

Bell
crank
Fig. 7.28: Seventh difference lock collapsible link (view from rear).

X 7 way off to the right, outside the limits of the drawing). The collapsible link as viewed

from the back of the Engine is shown in Fig. 7.28 (the cam stack is to the left of the image).
The operating lever is the diagonal bronze component and the slotted link in steel is the
locking link.

185

7 Drive

The seventh difference
Lock

lock is driven, as are the
other odd difference
locks, by horizontal bar
13

Locking
link

A (A/160) which is

slung underneath (not
visible in Fig. 7.28). The
lock is released
(disengaged) when lifted
and the bell crank

Bell
crank

operates, as before, by
lifting the vertical drive

Fig. 7.29: Seventh difference lock (detail).

link to the lock.
However, instead of lifting the vertical link to the lock directly as for the unmodified locks
the bell crank lever drives the lower pivot of the collapsible link upwards at the times in the
cycle that the odd locks are lifted. Whether or not this motion is transmitted to the lock
depends on the state of the collapsible link.
The link as shown in Figs. 7.28 and 7.29 is in its uncollapsed state i.e. in the position in
which it transmits the crank motion to the lock to lift it into disengagement. Driving the
slotted steel link (the locking link) forwards (left to right in Fig. 7.29) collapses the link i.e.
hinges the link clockwise into its collapsed state and, because the pivot for the vertical
drive link to the lock is offset, the
collapsed link lowers the lock and in
doing so engages it to immobilise the
seventh difference figure wheel column.
The action to lower the lock is assisted,
Fixed
pivot

and partly maintained, by the weight of
the lock bearing downwards. So

Rocker
lever

operating the slotted link collapses the
link and drops the lock into engagement
with the seventh difference figure
wheels where it remains largely under its

Operating
lever

own weight, and with the drive between

Even sector
horizontal
bar

the bell crank and the lock disabled.
The slotted link is driven by the bronze
operating lever (Fig. 7.28) the drive for
which is taken from the even sector

Fig. 7.30: Collapsible link drive (view from front).

186

7 Drive

horizontal bar 24E (A/163, 337 E 22). The operating lever is driven from a rocker lever
pivoted on 24E via a shaft held by an additional bracket, fixed to a right-hand framing
upright, to provide a fixed pivot (Fig. 7.30). The linear reciprocal motion of the even sector
horizontal bar drives the operating lever of the collapsing hinge to and fro. The even sector
bar 24E moves to the left (A/160 and Fig. 7.30) to lower the sectors into engagement and
this occurs at the start of the second half cycle when the seventh difference lock needs to
secure the seventh difference column (337 X 21). 24E moving left drives the operating
lever anticlockwise (as in Fig. 7.28) driving the slotted link forward to collapse the link.
With the link collapsed the brief corrective engagement of the odd difference locks that
occurs at 35 units is ignored as collapsed link cannot transmit the motion and the lock is
anyway already engaged.
Modification to Follower Arm Pivot Positions
A small change was made to the position of the even figure wheel axes cam follower pivot,
8

G (A/159 lower right). As drawn, the cam follower boss fouls the even lock horizontal bar
A) and also fouls the end bar support (shown in blue pencil, partially dotted). To avoid

(12

fouling, the position of this pivot was moved forward (down on the drawing) and slightly
left to provide clearance. The slight alteration to the pivot requires lengthening the
corresponding bar lever, 8M. As originally drawn there are only two different lengths for
the eight bar levers. The two lower bar levers 7K (odd difference figure wheel lock) and
8

M (even difference figure wheel axis) are one length, and the remaining six bar levers,

another. To maintain only two standard lengths, the pivot for the odd lock cam follower
was also moved to equalise the lengths of the two lower bar levers. The new positions
were located on the same pitch circle. The cams themselves were modified slightly to
compensate for the slightly extended lever lengths to ensure the correct final travel of the
bars.
Timing
As described earlier the basic timing data is derived from the original timing diagram
F/385/1 (Fig. 3.2) which provides the main source of information on the sequence and
phasing of the motions in the calculating cycle. However, the original timing diagram lacks
a level of fine detail and in some instances is more in the nature of an indicative guide
rather than an exact specification. There are a number of inconsistencies in the Timing
Diagram (the even difference figure wheel axis shows no return motion, for example,
(though this was later corrected), and the direction of rotation for the correct operation of
the warning mechanism is in error). The most serious omissions concern the timing of the
locks. Unlike the motions of the calculating axes and wheels, the action of the locks is not

187

7 Drive

specified in a separate column of phased actions indexed against the cycle divisions. The
locked and unlocked condition of the axes and wheels is indicated by an ‘L’ (locked) and a
reversed ‘F’ (presumably ‘Free’) though no detail is given for the lapping or phasing of the
actions of the locks. The circular motion of the odd figure wheel axis, for example, is
shown starting immediately the axis is lowered by 0.3" with ‘L’ and ‘F’ notations alongside
the arrows indicating locked and unlocked states. The timing of the withdrawal or entry of
the locks as an event with a finite duration is not indicated on the diagram and the
avoidance of contention is simply implied.
In the case of the even figure wheels the Timing Diagram (F/385/1) shows the wheels
locked briefly between the end of the counter-clockwise motion giving-off odd-to-even,
and the start of the carry cycle. Here a unit interval of one Babbage-division (7.2) is
allowed for locking and unlocking. There is no horizontal grid on the diagram and the level
of precision in the drafstmanship discourages exact scaling. The practice of allowing a
single Babbage timing unit as the standard nominal interval for actions is a feature of the
diagram. Inexactly specified timing intervals are not confined to locking action.
The new timing diagram (337 X 21) supplements the original by providing the detailed
lapping and phasing information otherwise lacking. The redrawn version shows the timing
of an event specified as the number of degrees of a 360 cycle starting from Babbage’s
original zero datum. Babbage’s 50-division cycle is retained for convenience of reference
but was not used in the modern specification.
Lapping and Clearance
In the case of lifts from leading followers, the rise in the cam profile starts at the point in
the cycle at which the motion starts i.e. the point of contact with the follower coincides
with the start of the rise, and the start of the rise is taken as the critical reference. In other
instances it is necessary to sustain a motion to overlap another motion. Here the start of
the fall is taken as the starting reference and is used, making allowance for clearance, as
the reference for the rise on the mating cam which initiates the return motion. For
example, the odd figure wheel axis is raised and lowered once during each calculating
cycle. Cam 1A lifts the axis and 2A lowers it. The lifting action on the cam occurs between
67 and 75 which gives the start of the leading rise, and the duration. The corresponding
fall on 2A is given a few degrees clearance and is specified between 64 to 73 (337 E 373
A). The few degrees timing clearance correspond to a clearance of about 0.003" between
the passive follower and 2A. The action to lower the axis is determined by the rise on 2A.
This action occurs between 357 and 5 and a corresponding clearance is allowed on the
fall on 1A (337 E 374 A). The timings given in this example are taken from the cam

188

7 Drive

specification. These are not always identical to the timings on the redrawn timing diagram.
For example, the timing diagram (337 X 21) shows the lifting action starting at 68 though
the start of the rise on the cam is shown at 67. The foot of the follower is slightly angled
and as the foot starts to mount the rise the actual point of contact leads the point of
contact that is active on the plateaus. A 1 lag in the cam rise is introduced to compensate.
Allowance was made for the roller followers used for the sector vertical motions. The
active surface leads the centre of the roller by a few degrees and this was taken into
account when specifying the take-off point of the rise.
Timing of the Locks
The cams for the locks presented special difficulties. A single calculating cycle requires four
separate episodes of engagement of the figure wheel locks, at 10, 25, 35 and 50 units (337
X 21). Three of these are short corrective engagements to re-align minor derangements
and to secure the figure wheels during momentary otherwise unsecured intervals. These
occur at 10, 25, and 50 units for even figure wheel locks, and at 25, 35, 50 units for odd
figure wheel locks. The longer locking periods (at 35 units for evens, and 10 for odds, 337 X
21) are to secure the figure wheels after giving-off while the sectors disengage and the
alternate axes carry. The figure wheels that have just given off remain locked until the
sectors restore their ‘lost’ value.
In instances where Babbage made allowances for the time taken for entry and withdrawal
locks he allocated a single nominal timing unit corresponding to 7.2 in a 360° cycle
(F/385/1). However, working back from the rises on the locking cams shown in A/169 the
actual period for locking and unlocking occupies 10 (4 for entry, 2 for dwell, and 4 for
withdrawal). It is clear from the cam details in A/169 and A/159 which specify the height of
the rise, pressure angle, dwell and fall, that Babbage did consider in detail how the
operation of the locks should be phased. In the modern implementation the minimum
interval is 11 (4 plus 3 plus 4) primarily to ease the pressure angle of the rise. The
difficulty was then to fit these slightly stretched locking actions (particularly the three short
engagements) into the already tight timing cycle. The solution in the case of the figure
wheel axes was to shorten the duration of the circular motions (without reducing the total
rotation) to allow for the locking action, in particular for the withdrawal of the locks so as
to avoid contention between the lock and the circular motion of the figure wheels that
follows. The dwell of the locks was extended slightly in some instances to cater for the
exact locus of the point of contact of the follower on the cam profile.

189

7 Drive

Phasing the Vertical Motions
The cams are keyed to the central cam drive shaft (cam 1A is the sole exception, see below
Driving the Cams, p. 192). The position of the keys is critical in ensuring the correct
phasing of the motions separately created by the eight cam pairs. The original drawings do
not indicate a datum for the keyways nor any keyway positions. An arbitrary datum was
chosen: the single keyway running the length of the cam drive shaft is positioned at the
front of the engine when the cycle is at 0.
If the active point of contact on each of the follower arms was at the front of the Engine
then all the keyways would be in line and at zero. However, the pivots are distributed
around the cams and the cam keyways need to be offset relative to the front of the engine
to compensate i.e. each cam needs to be rotated from the zero datum until the event on
the cam that is to occur at zero is at the point of contact of the appropriate follower. The
position of the cam keyway is then fixed at the front of the engine. Because of the
standardised geometry of the pivots, follower arms and standard outside cam diameter,
once the offset calculation is done for one cam of the pair, the keyway of the mating cam is
found by adding or subtracting a fixed offset of 56 depending on whether the mating cam
is leading or lagging.
The offset for each of the sixteen cams needs to be calculated separately. The keyway
calculation for the even warning cams (cams 15 and 16) is described in the following
example.
Keyway Offset — Example
The first step is to calculate the angular displacement (Θ) of the pivot centre. The
coordinates of the even warning pivot are given by the pitch circle radius (7.35") and the
distance from the horizontal axis (4.50" scaled from A/159). The displacement of the pivot
centre is simply given by arcsine 4.5/7.35.
The next step is to determine the angular displacement of the point of contact of the
follower arm. Since the cams rotate anticlockwise, the leading arm is the one to the right
of the pivot and the trailing arm is to the left. With the leading arm tangential to the
outside diameter of the cam (i.e. at the top of the 0.50" rise) the angle subtended at the
cam shaft centre by a 3.50" follower arm is 2826’. It would be convenient if this could be
rounded down to 28 to save carrying the 26’ through each calculation. For practical
purposes the error introduced by this rounding down was ignored on the following
considerations. The height of the rises in the case of the warning cams is 0.5". The foot of

190

7 Drive

the active rise determines the start of the motion for both leading and trailing arms. The
locus of the point of contact is a circular arc of radius equal to the effective length of the
follower arm. Taking this into account shows that a 3.50" arm at the foot of the 0.50" rise
subtends and angle of 285’ i.e. only 5’ of arc off the rounded figure. Working backwards it
emerges that a 3.45" arm at the top of the rise subtends and angle of exactly 28. If for
purposes of calculation the distance to the point of contact is taken as 3.45" (the physical
distance remains unchanged at 3.50") then the difference on the outer circumference of
the cam amounts to 0.050" which corresponds to a worst-case timing error of 26’ of arc in
the start of the falls and the end of the rises.
Using a 3.45" arm in the calculation to represent a physical arm of 3.50" (it is emphasised
that the physical arm remains 3.50") introduces timing error of 5’ of arc for a 3.50" arm at
the foot of the rise (a 3.45" arm tangential at the top of a rise has the same timing
relationship as a 3.50" arm at the foot of a 0.59" rise). A worst case error of 0.050" on the
circumference of a 13" cam was considered to be acceptable and a worst case timing error
of 26’ was considered to be an acceptable price to pay for substantial simplification of both
calculation and manufacturing specification given that the resolution of the timing had
already been increased from Babbage’s 50-division per cycle scale to a more conventional
360 scale (a factor of 7.2). The errors introduced by using 3.45" as the arm length for
purposes of calculation, and taking both follower arms tangential to the outer
circumference at the same time (physically this never occurs as one follower is at the foot
of a rise when the other is at the top), were therefore regarded as negligible for practical
purposes in all cases except the lock timing for which the timing cycle is particularly tight
and for which special provision was made for the circular locus of the point of contact.
With the follower arms represented by a 3.45" line tangential to the outer circumference
we are now in a position to determine the angular displacement of the points of contact
i.e. Θ ± 28. The cams rotate anticlockwise viewed from above. The even warning pivot
thus lags the zero position by 270-Θ and the leading point of contact lags by 270-Θ-28.
The later the event in the timing cycle the further clockwise on the cam is the
corresponding rise or fall i.e. lag corresponds to clockwise displacement of the keyway.
The keyway offset for the leading even warning cam (Cam 16) is therefore 270-Θ-28
clockwise from the zero datum (20415’). Similarly, the displacement of the trailing point
of contact lags the leading point of contact by a round and convenient 56. This translates
into a clockwise displacement of keyway for the trailing cam (Cam 15) of 26015’.

191

7 Drive

Driving the Cams
All the vertical motion cams were made
from identical blanks (337 E 391 C)
specified with maximum metal and
machined to suit differing requirements
of outer shape and vertical spacing.
Fourteen of the cams (1 through 9, 13
through 16, plus 11) have the bosses
machined down for the six closely spaced
pairs. The two cam pairs for the sectors
which are spaced further apart have the
bosses left intact (Cams 10 and 12).
Cams 1 and 2 (odd figure wheel axes)

Fig. 7.31: Three paired vertical-motion cams.

have the standard close spacing but

special provision is made to accommodate the lubricated annular cam shaft bearing set
into the lower framing plate. A/160 shows the bearing and the cam in the same plane but
no details are given for clearance or for securing the lower-most cam (1A). The lower cam
shaft bearing prevents Cam 1 being keyed to the shaft. The boss on 1A was removed to
clear the cam shaft bearing and Cam 1 is screwed and dowelled to Cam 2. Cam 1, fixed as
an undercarriage to Cam 2, is driven by Cam 2 which is keyed to the cam shaft. Each of the
other fourteen cams is keyed and each cam is screwed and dowelled to its mating cam.
Cam 1 is the only cam not keyed to the shaft. Fig. 7.31 shows three pairs of vertical motion
cams screwed and dowelled in pairs with bosses removed. (The cam at bottom right is a
circular motion cam.)
Verification
The cam rises and phasing were verified graphically. Tracings of the cams were overlaid on
the mating cam as though fixed together and the motion and clearances checked using
tracings of the follower arms. The standard 56 lag is a significant drafting convenience in
ensuring that the dowelling and fixing holes of the mating cams line up as well as aligning
the aperture cut-outs. (See 337 E 383 A&B for warning cams (leading); 337 E 384 A&B for
warning cams (trailing).)
The cams were manufactured without keyways in the first instance. During assembly each
cam was fixed and pinned to its mating cam and turned by hand on the shaft. When the
motions of the followers were verified, the keyways were cut with the cams still fixed in
mating pairs.

192

7 Drive

For discussion of the symmetry of rises and falls in conjugate cams, the direct generation of
cam profiles using inked rollers, subsequent manufacture and verification, see Chapter 9,
Build, Cam Profiles, pp. 202-4.
Manufacture and Assembly of the Follower Arms
The original drawings give no details of how the pairs of follower arms are to be fashioned.
The two roller-cum-slider arms were made as one piece (337 E 353&4). The twelve twinslider arms were made in two parts spigotted together so that the two arms could be
rotated to alter the angle between them. The paired arms were assembled on the pivot
shaft with the position of the arms provisionally fixed with grub screws. Fine adjustment to
the arm positions was carried out with the assembly and related cams in situ. The follower
assembly was then removed from the cam stack, the arms (still fixed in relation to each
other by grub screws) were marked before being slid off the pivot shaft, were welded
together, slid back on and then pinned to the pivot shaft. There was an awareness that this
procedure might be overcautious. It was nonetheless considered preferable to having to
scrap out-of-specification follower arm assemblies that might result from fixing the angles
without trial.
The contact foot of each slider arm was case-hardened before adjustment and welding to
ensure that any heat distortion from the hardening process did not affect the trial settings.

193

8 Framing

8.

Framing

Main Drawings: A/161, A/163, A/164, A/176, 337 F, 337 A.
‘Framing ’ refers to the fixed structure supporting the working parts of the Engine. It includes
the two base support rails which run the full length of the engine and on which the engine
rests, vertical framing supports, upper and lower horizontal frames, bearing plates supporting
the calculating axes, printer shaft mountings which straddle the two base supports, rack
mountings, and the cam stack pillars, drive shaft mountings, and cam stack framing.
8.1 Calculating Section
The calculating axes are contained between bearing plates which span, front to rear, the
upper and lower horizontal frames or trays (A/163, A/164). The upper frame (O1, O2,

O3, O8 A/164) is shown resting on uprights (1B1 , 2B1 (rear); 4B2 3B2 (front) A/163,
A/176) and the lower frame (3N1 3N2 3N3 3N4, A/176 roughly midway up the engine) is
shown with open corners let in to the uprights (A/161, A/176). The upper frame is shown
as a single tray (A/164), possibly as a one-piece casting or, given the absence of piecepart detail, the single-tray representation is possibly a drafting shorthand. There is no
indication on the elevation (A/163) of piece part assembly of the frame. Similarly, the
sub-assembly of the lower tray is unclear (A/161, A/176). No fixing is shown for the
upper (A/163) or lower frames (A/161, A/176) to the uprights. (The fixing on the top left
of A/161 is for the rack support).
There is an inconsistency in the dimensions given for the overall length of the frame as
annotated at the bottom of A/161 (‘5 feet 2 ¼ inches’) and the dimension scaled from the
arrangement as drawn and calculated from the geometry of the calculating mechanism.
The distance between figure wheel axes derived from A/171 is 6.98". Seven such pitches
give the distance between the first and last figure wheel axes as 48.86". Adding to this
the scaled dimensions to each end of the frame (5" to the right and 8.14" to the left)
gives a figure of 62" for the overall length of the frame. The annotation at the bottom of
A/161 gives 62¼ " for this same overall dimension – a discrepancy of 0.25". The scaled
figure of 62" was used and the annotation ignored.
Because of the difficulty casting large one-piece framing pieces, and the difficulty
machining the surfaces for the bearing plates inside a tray, especially on the upper frame,
the two framing trays were each made from four separate parts: a pair of end pieces
(short dimension of the engine, left and right 337 F 311 A-D), and a pair of members (long

194

8 Framing

dimension, front and rear 337 F 312 A-D). In the notations for the framing pieces, each
of the four framing members for each of the two trays have the same part identifier
letter, the same Index of Identity, and different indices of Linear Position (Fig. 1.2). The
Notation therefore suggests that the trays were intended to be made in four sections
though the use of the notations in the Engine drawings overall does not always adhere to
the declared rules for lettering drawings.
The original drawings do not show an end elevation. Curves were added to the upper
and lower end pieces modelled on those shown for the front (long) member of the lower
tray (A/163). Apart from appearances, the additional material increases the shortest
diagonal dimension and strengthens the corner.
The four end pieces are made from one pattern differently machined. The upper and
lower frame ends have different vertical depths. The lower right-hand frame end (337 F
311 B) takes the main drive bearing, and loose pieces are added to the pattern to provide
for this. The top left frame end (337 F 311 D) has mounting holes for the printing
mechanism, a central circular clearance cut-out, and a rectangular cut-out. The need for
clearance cut-outs for the printer (D only) became evident after the drawings had been
sent out for manufacture and while the printer drawings were being progressed. The
frame ends were sent for additional machining after they were first delivered.
No provision is made in the original design for securing the engine while being
transported. Additional fixings were provided on the top frame ends to take
transportation bars. Eight tie-bars strap the framing to the steel base on which the
engine rests. The transportation fixings are omitted on the lower frame ends by
removing the loose pieces from the pattern when casting. The transportation bosses are
not visible to normal viewing from ground level and can only be seen if the machine is
viewed from above.
Details of the cross-bracing arrangement and piece-part drawings are in the A-series
construction drawings. Procedures for bracing the Engine for transport are described in
the User Manual (2013), Moving the Engine, p. 127.
Front and Rear Framing Pieces
The top and bottom bearing plates (for examples of lower bearing plates see A/176) span
the front and rear framing members and are fixed to a raised machined lip along the top
of the inside bottom flange of the angle (Tracing BAB/B/006). The height of this

195

8 Framing

machined surface was taken as 1/8" (337 F 312 C&D). This dimension is taken from the
depth of the internal pad on the upright intended to receive the lower frame (A/176).
Pads for pulley brackets (for the gut cord to operate the uncoupling clutch A/163) are
required on the right-hand side only, front and rear framing pieces. (The rear pulley is an
additional one fitted to counterbalance the scoop cam clutch for end-of-page halting (Fig.
7.10 .p. 156). Only these two pads were machined. Redundant pads on left front and
rear are unsighted on the inside and were left intact after casting.
The four long framing pieces were similarly cast from one pattern, differently machined.
Differences between upper and lower members include: vertical depth; the omission of
curves on the underside of the upper framing pieces (337 F 31 A - D, A/163), and the
location of bearing plate holes.
The depth of the upper frame is shown as less than that of the lower frame and it was
thought at one stage that the upper frame would need to be strengthened. The idea of
strengthening the upper frame arose from attempts to separate and apportion the load
of the calculating mechanism between the upper and lower frames. For example,
assigning to the upper frame, via the counter balancing springs, the weight of the
warning shaft assemblies, sector and figure wheel shafts, figure wheel shafts and zeroing
arms, and assigning to the lower frame, via the figure wheel supports, the weight of the
figure wheels. Separating the loads in this way suggests that the upper frame is more
heavily loaded than the lower frame and that the aesthetic of a more slender upper
frame conflicts with the load distribution. However, this view does not give full weight to
the structural role of the figure wheel supports (A/176) which couple to two frame
assemblies and stiffen the whole structure. The twenty-four figure wheel supports (three
per axis), fixed between the upper and lower bearing plates, act as pillars or struts giving
rigidity to the structure (Figs. 3.6, 3.14). The overall length of the figure wheel supports
was tied to close tolerances to aid uniform distribution of load between the two frames.
Measures to strengthen the upper frame were not pursued and the original dimensions
were adhered to.
The uprights were extended to the full height of the engine to allow the upper tray to be
let in and still retain the overall height for the calculating axes. The two long frame
members screw to the frame ends and are lapped. Fixing is by tapped recessed cheese
head screws.

196

8 Framing

Rack Mounting
Main Drawings: A/160, A/161, A/163, A/171
Sets of toothed racks meshing with gear sectors provide the intermittent reciprocating
circular motion for the odd and even figure wheel axes, the odd and even sector axes and
the odd and even warning axes (Figs. 7.11, 7.12, A/171 bottom right). The racks are
mounted on backing bars and run in channels machined in the rack mountings (see 7.3
Circular Motions, p. 157).
The layout of the circular motion rack mountings for the figure wheel axes are well
defined in A/163. The same cannot be said for the rack layout and sector gears for
warning and sector axes the layout for which is not immediately obvious from the density
of A/160. The racks for the circular motions of the four odd figure wheel axes are
mounted in a single machined casting (6I, A/160), and similarly for the four even figure
wheel axes with the single machined casting 9I. The rack mounting for the odd warning
axes is also one machined casting (4K) and similarly for the even warning axes, 5K.
The figure wheel axes and the warning axes are in line so the first odd warning axis
(seventh difference, extreme right) is masked in A/163. However, A/163 shows the bevel
drive for the first odd carry shaft indicating the inclusion of a carry mechanism here. The
original intention to include a full carry mechanism for the seventh difference is
confirmed in A/161 and A/164. The seventh difference carry and warning axes were
omitted as redundant as described earlier (p. 162). The profile of the curve for the righthand end of the figure wheel rack mounting (337 F 35) was taken from 2J (A/163).
The figure wheel rack mounting (2J, A/163) is shown supported at the base only (A/163,
A/160 bottom left). Three additional mounting ears were added to the top of the casting
to provide additional back-to-front support (337 F 351). The additional support was
provided as a precaution against strain from side thrust in the event of jams or even
resistance during normal use.
Bearing Plates
Bearing plates, supporting the axes top and bottom, span the front and rear members of
the framing members of the upper and lower trays (A/176, Fig. 8.1). In both trays the
plates rest on machined lips running the full length of the trays (337 F 312). The framing
plates support figure wheel axes, sector wheel axes, carry and warning axes, locks,

197

8 Framing

twenty-four figure wheel supports, sliders for the zero stop pillars (three for each figure
wheel axis, O, P, Q, A/176), and sector wheel zero stop pillars. The length of the figure
wheel support pillars is finely machined and they serve to both strengthen the frame and
share the load of the axes between the upper and lower trays.

Fig. 8.1: Upper framing plates. View from above.

The relative positions of the addition and carry mechanism components are shown in
A/164, A/171 and A/176. In each of these three drawings both odd and even carry
mechanisms are shown handed to the right. The mirroring correction of alternate axes
(p. 47) requires the odd numbered axes to be opposite handed (Fig. 3.22, 337 X 26) i.e.
with the carry axes handed to the left, the position of the locks, figure wheel supports,
carry axis and sector wheel zero stops invited review. The odd and even bearing plates,
drawn in the original as identical ceased to be so. The positions of the locks are
unchanged but there are other modifications in consequence of mirroring.
The differences between upper and lower bearing plates are small but significant. The
counter-bores are handed in the case of the fixing holes for the figure wheel supports
and the sector zero stops. The counter-bores for the bearing plate fixing holes are not
handed (fixing holes are not shown in the original drawings). Similarly, the shaft bearing
holes for the carry axes, warning axes, sector wheel axes, and figure wheel axes are
counter-bored but not handed. The pair of bearing plates for the constant difference
(seventh odd difference column) has the warning and carry-axes shaft bearing holes
omitted as the carry mechanism for this axis was omitted, and the position of fixing holes
were altered to accommodate the new back-to-back placement of the figure wheel zero

198

8 Framing

stops (compare mirrored layout in 337 X 26 with A/171). Bearing plate variants are
shown in construction drawing 337 F 37.
Base Supports and Shaft Mountings
Main Drawings: A/159, A/163, A/165, A/167, 337 F 381 A&B
The base supports consist of two long cast members with a basic right-angle cross section
running the length of the machine front and rear. A/163 shows the right-hand vertical
framing piece (3B2) resting on a boxed platform cast into the base support, and the left
vertical (4B2) resting on a cantilevered platform. The same is assumed to be the case for
the rear two uprights (1B1 (left), and 2B1 (right)). The left-hand cam stack pillar (1

A 1 ) is

also shown resting on a cantilevered platform (A/163 and A/167). The right cam stack
pillars rest on cylindrical bosses on the end mounts (A/167, 337 F 383).
The three drawings A/163, A/165, A/167 show three shaft mountings along the length of

C ). The shaft mountings span the two base supports.

the output apparatus drive shaft (4

One shaft mounting is provided at each end of the base supports, D (left), B (right),
with the third (C) in between to the left of midpoint. A fourth shaft mounting was
provided in addition just inside left of the printer drive gear for additional support. The
three left-most shaft mountings are identical (337 F 382). The right-hand end mounting
(337 F 383) has two bosses for the cam stack pillars and two half-bossed holes for the
sliding bars support (A/167 left).
Each of the base support rails (A1, A/163 is thickened in four places by the addition of
pads on the lower surface of the base supports positioned under the verticals – this to
cover the protrusion of the cam stack pillar bolt (A/167 bottom left) and to provide a
machined surface for levelling jacks.
Cam Stack Support
A/167 shows the cam stack pillars secured below to the base supports. No upper fixing is
shown and the drive shaft assembly from the crank provides the only other fixing for the
cam stack frame. Two Upper framing ties (Fig. 8.2) were added to keep the drive shaft

199

8 Framing

aligned and to reduce the
Cam stack
upper framing
plate

risk of the machine breaking
its back when moved. A/164
and A/159 show plan views
of the cam stack framing
plates. The upper framing
plate (337 F 424) was
extended by the addition of

Additional
tie (1 of 2)

two ears similar to the those
shown for the lower framing
plate (A/159). The upper
framing ties (337 F 423 A&B)
fix the ears to the verticals to

Fig. 8.2: Additional ties for cam stack frame.

secure the upper portion of
the cam stack.
Drive Shaft Bearing

F , 6F,

There is an inconsistency in the dimensions given for the drive shaft bearing (5

A/163 on top of the cam stack) as shown in A/159 and A/163. In the full-sized drawing of
the bearing in A/159 (faint blue lower left between the two notations tables) the

A ) centre is drawn

dimension from the bottom of the base of the bearing to the shaft (1

as 5¼". A/163 shows same dimension at 4½". The discrepancy is accounted for by the
difference in the drawn thicknesses of the cam stack framing plates in A/160 and the
thickness dimensions annotated in A/159. Specifically, the bottom cam stack framing
plate is drawn as ½" thick in A/160 though the manuscript annotation in A/159 (top left
corner of left-hand drawing) gives the thickness as 1". Similarly, the upper framing plate
is drawn as ½" thick in A/160 but the handwritten annotation in A/159 calls for ¾" (top
right corner of left-hand view). The middle framing plate is drawn in A/160 ½" thick and
annotated in A/159 as ½". The discrepancy between the plate thicknesses as annotated
and the thicknesses as drawn is ¾" which is the difference between the distances to the
shaft centre as shown variously in A/159 and A/163. The annotated thicknesses were
used rather than the drawn thicknesses on the basis that these superseded the alreadydrawn plate thicknesses in A/160 and the end view of the bearing in A/159, and the
distance to the shaft centre was implemented as 4½" (337 F 421). The plate thicknesses
appear to have been amended by annotation on A/159 without amending the shaft
bearing drawing in A/159, or the cam stack layout (A/160) which had already been
drawn. A/163 was clearly drawn to the annotated dimensions and was used elsewhere

200

8 Framing

in the original drawings in the layout of the machine.

8.2 Output Apparatus
The framing and modifications to the framing for the printing and stereotyping apparatus
are described in Additional Modifications, 8. Modifications to Frame, p. 146-7.

201

9 Build

9.

Build

The following section identifies issues of construction, assembly, and setting up that arose
during the build.
Base Rails
The Engine rests on two cast base rails that run the full length of the machine front and rear
(A/163). Cast base rails were delivered dog-legged at the printer end i.e. splayed outwards.
Time pressure to complete was against having them remade despite contractual entitlement to
replacements. Fixing-holes for the upright framing members and for the legs supporting the
printer drive shaft bearings (which span the rails) had been drilled in the machined palms on the
rails but were not aligned to correct for the distortion. It appears that they were marked out by
reference to two inconsistent datums possibly resulting from two separate stages of planing.
The issue was solved by elongating the fixing holes in the shaft bearing supports and in the base
of the uprights and using the supplied rails modified in this way.
Cam Profiles
The cam profiles are determined for the ideal case in which the locus of the follower is a
rectilinear path along the radial line of the cam i.e. the path that would occur with follower arms
of theoretically infinite length. However, conjugate cam pairs have finite cam follower arms (of
equal length) which rotate on the same pivot i.e. the locus of the followers is an arc, not a line,
with a radius equal to the length of the follower arm. For the idealised case, the rises on one
cam would be mirrored as symmetrical inversions for the falls on the conjugate cam. In the
actual case of short pivoted follower arms, cams designed for ideal follower trajectories could
result in clearance gaps between the followers and the cams, or interference.
For example, an anti-clockwise rotating cam with a rise on the main cam drives the follower
outwards (A/170 helps to visualise this case). If the arm is trailing then the sweep of the arc has
the effect of lagging the follower behind the position it would take were the locus a linear radial
one. At a given point in the rise the outward displacement will be slightly less than ideal with
the worst-case deviation from the radial line occurring at mid-rise. The effect of the trailing
follower on the conjugate follower is to displace it towards the fall by less than would be the
case for an ideal follower arm of infinite length. In this case the effect of the lag of the main
follower on the conjugate follower is to create a clearance between the conjugate follower and
the fall. However, there is a self-cancelling effect. The follower arm on the conjugate cam is a
leading arm. Because of the finite radius of the follower arm, the arc of the follower locus

202

9 Build

reaches forward, as it were, into the fall i.e. the follower leads the position is would occupy
were the geometry ideal. The leads and lags are at least partly self-cancelling.
In the example cited, the rise of the main cam is taken as the drive. In the general case it cannot
be assumed that all rises, whether on the main cam or its conjugate, provide active drive: in the
case of vertical motions the fall could be active in lowering the weight of an axis under gravity
and/or controlling a return motion biased from the neutral position by a counterbalancing
spring. Similarly, if a trailing follower was faced with a fall it would lag and therefore not clear
the fall as quickly as an ideal follower. The conjugate leading follower would reach into the rise
and be displaced outwards earlier than the ideal. Again, the tendency of the lag and lead to
create either clearance or interference respectively is self-cancelling.
The general direction of deviation from ideal is as follows: if the main cam is leading then the
non-ideal locus will act to produce interference; on the conjugate cam the deviation from ideal
on trailing follower will act to produce a clearance; a leading follower on the main cam in the
face of a fall will produce clearance; and the conjugate trailing follower on the rise, interference.
Since the effects of the non-ideal follower trajectories appear to be self-cancelling no account
was taken of deviations from ideal loci when the cam profiles were specified i.e. the cam pairs
were specified with symmetrical rises and falls. Since the vertical motions of the axes are
comparatively small the rises and falls in the profiles are proportionately modest. In contrast,
the circular motions cams show more extreme variation. So the effect of the non-ideal
behaviour of the followers was ignored in the case of the vertical motion cams and these were
cut, finished and hardened without correction. However, in the case of the circular motion
cams, there remained uncertainty as to the correctness of the reasoning that the effects were
self-cancelling. Since the cam profiles are critical to the correct functioning of the engine the
circular motion cams were finalised in a two-stage process during the build.
All the rises on the six circular motion cams were cut but none of the falls i.e. excess material
was left in the sector corresponding to the falls. The pair was assembled on the stack and an
inked roller substituted for the roller follower on the partially cut cam. When driven, the
follower of the fully finished cam tracked normally, and the inked roller, driven by the rises of
the conjugate cam, traced out the required profiles of the falls on the unfinished cam. The
traced profile was then compared with the profile based on idealised rises and falls. The process
was carried out on all the circular motion cam pairs. In each case the difference between the
inked profile and ideal profile was negligible, and the conjugate cams were cut, finished and
hardened with no modification. This two-stage process specifying the cams served to confirm
the reasoning that the effects of non-ideal follower trajectories were self-cancelling. Comparing

203

9 Build

the profiles generated in situ by the rises with those specified on the drawing board served also
to verify the correctness of the specification before the commitment to final manufacture.
The start and stop positions of the rises and falls are critical to timing. The effect of the nonideal loci of the followers does not affect this timing: each circular motion follower describes a
single motion which starts and finishes at either the minimum or maximum displacement, and it
is clear from the geometry of the original design that the minimum and maximum follower
displacements both occur on the radial line through the cam centre i.e. the follower is tangential
at the mean diameter. Geometrically this corresponds to the pivot point of the follower arms
being chosen such that the line bisecting the sector of motion of a follower arm is at right angles
to the radial line through the cam centre. The effect of the non-ideal loci of the followers is
therefore to slightly alter the internal timing of the excursions of the followers within a rise or
fall but not to alter the cam angle or the timing window within which the excursion is
completed. Since the rises and falls are arcs of circles i.e. monotone increasing or decreasing
curves with no inflection points within a single excursion, there are no internal events within the
timing window that might be affected by the deviation from ideal of the follower loci.
Speed of Operation
When the machine was first assembled the manual drive was relatively stiff and for reasons of
caution the operating speeds were kept low. After several thousand cycles the manual drive
freed up using a run-in speed of 10 complete engine cycles per minute i.e. one tabular
calculation every six seconds (40 turns of the handle per minute with the 4:1 reduction gear). If
the machine is run faster than this, the sprung roller of the intermittent circular motion drive of
the carry axes tends to overshoot its recess in the register pinion and cause jamming of the drive
(p. 167). If the motion of the main crank is erratic or too slow, the sectors, when lowered, tend
not to mesh cleanly with the figure wheels, and jams occur. This is thought to be related to the
effects the bell-cranks flexing under load and, at slow speeds, producing timing lags. With
sufficient uniform momentum the meshing is unproblematic in normal operation.
Cam Keyways
Since the lead-in and lead-out timings are critical and since the relative phasing of the cams can
only be verified during the build, the keyways in cams and the main cam drive shaft were cut
narrower than indicated in the drawings. This was to allow for fine timing adjustments during
the build should this prove necessary. This measure allowed some leeway to fine tune the
phasing between cam pairs as well as between one cam and its conjugate. In the event, no
adjustment was needed, and the keyways were opened out to the specified size.

204

9 Build

Figure Wheel Drive Arms
A Trial Piece (Fig. 3.14, p. 30) was built to verify the new layout in which alternate axes are
mirrored. The internal drive arms fixed to the figure wheel drive axes were manufactured as
indicated in the original drawings i.e. with no chamfers on the undersides to provide lead-in to
the internal nibs when lowered into the barrels of the figure wheels themselves. On the Trial
Piece the drive arms did not foul the internal nibs and there was no advance indication that
fouling might be a problem. However, with multiple figure wheel stacks, lowering the figure
wheel axes produced consistent jamming, especially with figure wheels set at 0 or 9 at which
points the clearances are small. The solution was to chamfer the undersides of the drive arms
to make the engagement less critical.
Setting Up Initial Values – Manual Figure Wheel Locks
The setting up procedure consists of a series of operations that allow the figure wheels to be set
manually to the initial values of differences. This includes setting the tabular value from which
tabulation is to start. The design of the calculating section features several measures to protect
the integrity of the calculation: the figure wheel and sector wheel locks as well as the horns on
the carry levers restrict size of the time windows in which the figure and sector wheels are free
to move as well as restricting the origin of their motions to legitimate sources only (p. 35).
These measures are intended to prevent derangement of the wheels during normal operation
i.e. movement imparted by extraneous action, deliberate or inadvertent. The security measures
prevent inputting initial values by manually altering figure wheel settings at an arbitrary time
and these security devices need to be disabled or bypassed to allow the figure wheels to be
turned by hand. An exact procedure is required to set up initial values.
Babbage provides no systematic description or explanatory text for the Engine as a whole. In a
rare exception a brief textual account is given (F/385/1, Fig. 9.1) for the setting up procedure as
a preface to the timing diagram (F/385/1) both dated March 1848. The setting up sequence
described takes the engine through two complete calculating cycles. The first cycle leaves the
sectors disengaged, the figure wheels zeroised and residual carries cleared. Initial values are
entered during the second full cycle. The procedure described by Babbage has a major flaw
which became evident when the procedure was attempted in practice.

205

9 Build

Fig. 9.1: Original setting up procedure for initial values (F/385/1, March 1848).

206

9 Build

The italicised sections below are transcriptions of the original text:
The Engine is to be stopped at the end of a cycle of 50 when both sets of sectors S will be at

F

zero, the bars 23E 24E which give them vertical motion ungeared by means of the axis 2
(see drawing 159) and all those sectors raised to their highest position by the handles 5

E

drawing 163.
The first instruction is to disengage the sector wheels from the figure wheels. The timing
diagram (which follows the manuscript description confirms that both odd and even sectors are
at zero at the end of the second half-cycle. Disengaging the sectors from the figure wheels by
raising them allows the figure wheels to be turned by hand without giving-off to the adjacent
lower difference column while the initial values are entered and, when the cycle is advanced,
during the rest of the setting up procedure. Both sets of sector wheels are fully disengaged
(raised to their highest point) for the duration of the setting up procedure.
The sectors are disengaged by operating the two lifting handles (Figs. 7.22, 7.23,5E5 5E6 A/163,
detail A/177). The left-hand handle lifts the odd sector axes to the fully raised position; the
right-hand handle lifts the even sector axes. At the end of the second half-cycle (‘the end of a
cycle of 50’) the odd sectors are fully raised and the left-hand lifting handle can be locked in
place with the pull-out plunger. However, to raise the even sectors, the horizontal sector bars
(23E 24E) need to be uncoupled from the horizontal drive levers at the cam stack end. This is

F , A/159 lower centre in red between the two notation

achieved by lifting the release lever (2

tables, with clear detail in A/168 top right viewed in portrait mode) which lifts both the odd and
even bar levers out of their drive slots in the sector bars (Fig. 7.24). This frees the lifting handle
to move the sector horizontal bar. The lifting handle is locked in the raised position, as before,
with the pull-out plunger (Fig. 7.23). Disengaging the sector bars prevents the vertical motion
drive from conflicting with the now immobilised sector axes when the engine is cycled during
the setting up procedure. (The lifting handles waggle slightly when the Engine is run).
Reduce all the Fig. wheels 1Δ to zero by moving the driving axis 1

A once round.

This step contains a major flaw which allows the setting up process being self-corrupting. The
timing diagram shows that at the start of the cycle the odd figure wheel locks disengage, the
odd figure wheel axes lower to bring the drive arms into the plane of the internal nibs, and the
odd figure wheels are then reduced to zero and then locked. The odd figure wheel axes then lift
to disengage the drive arms. During this process the odd figure wheels remain engaged with the
sectors which then restore the figure wheel number just given off. So, during the first half cycle
of normal operation the odd figure wheels are driven by the drive arms, or are locked, or are

207

9 Build

being restored by the sectors i.e. during normal operation the figure wheel motions are defined
and systematically constrained throughout. However, the first step of the setting up procedure
was to disengage the sectors. So during the set up procedure (as distinct from normal
operation) when the locks free the figure wheels for restoration by the sectors, the figure
wheels are not secured and it was found that during the return of the figure wheel axes, friction
between the axis and the figure wheels dragged back some of the figure wheels a varying
amount depending on the level of frictional drag, and displaced them from zero by an
indeterminate amount.
The occurrence of an interval during which the figure wheels are unsecured subverts the
intended zeroising action. Moreover, when the locks attempt to re-engage at the end of the
first half-cycle jams occurred on the wheels that were deranged by other than a full digit
interval. In normal operation any drag of this kind
would be unlikely to derange a figure wheel
meshed with a sector wheel because of the load
on the figure wheel would be well in excess on
anything that slight friction could derange. But
even if it did, the direction of motion simply
anticipates the action of the sector wheels to
restore the figure wheel values and any draginduced motion is non-corrupting. (During
normal operation the restoration of the figure
wheel values occurs during the same period as

Knurled
fixing
screws

the return stroke of the figure wheel axes.) The
process of zeroising the even figure wheels during
the second half cycle will be similarly thwarted by
this self-corrupting process. The amount of
frictional derangement is indeterminate and any
derangement that is not an integral angular
displacement of one digit will foul the locks at
next entry. Even if jamming the locks was not an
issue, the same unsecured dragging action of the
figure wheel axes would corrupt the initial values
during the second cycle of the setting up

Manual
lock

procedure.
The solution was to provide manual locks for each
of the axes. These consist of vertical slats of steel

Fig. 9.2: Operating manual locks.

208
Sector
axis

9 Build

fixed to the front-most figure wheel supports of each of the axes. The eight setting locks are
fixed to the vertical supports by knurled thumb screws passing through slotted holes in the
locks. In normal operation the locks are retracted and play no part. During setting up each lock
is freed by partially unscrewing the fixings by hand. The locks, which run the full length of the
figure wheel columns, when slid forwards, insert between the teeth of all the figure wheels in
the full-height column, and immobilise them in exactly the same way as do the vertical locks
activated automatically by the drive mechanisms. When engaged with the column of figure
wheel teeth the locks are secured in the locked position by retightening the fixings. The locks
come into play twice during setting up: they secure the figure wheels in the zero position during
the first set up cycle, and they secure the figure wheel initial values during the second cycle (see
below). The odd axes setting locks are engaged at the 10-unit point i.e. immediately after the
odds axes values are given off by driving the figure wheels to zero. Engaging the locks at the 10unit point ensures that the figure wheels can be zeroised by the figure wheel axes drive arms
without obstruction. The even setting locks are engaged at the 35-unit point for the same
reason.

A 20 units more, and set the Odd Difference Figure wheels 1Δ.

Move the axis 1

This is the start of the second full cycle of the setting up procedure. The 20-unit point occurs
during the period of normal operation in which the odd figure wheels would be restored by the
sectors. However, the sectors have been manually disengaged and the locks withdrawn, so the
figure wheels can be turned freely by hand to the required initial values. The reason for
advancing the engine to the 20-unit point is that this is the point in the cycle at which the carry
mechanism is inactive i.e. the odd carry levers have been driven against the reset stop by the
sweeping motion of the detent support arm and the odd difference figure wheels can be turned
in either direction without producing spurious warnings i.e. wheels can be turned to any of the
four decades without transitions between 9 and 0 setting carry warnings. Warnings set during
the setting up procedure before the 17-unit point are cleared automatically; those set after the
20-unit point would remain as residual warnings and have to be cleared by hand. The
advantage of setting odd difference initial values at the 20-unit point is twofold: there are no
spurious odd warnings to reset and therefore no danger of residual warnings from the setting
up procedure corrupting the calculation. Secondly, the figure wheels can be rotated in either
direction: if the carry mechanism was operative the curved warning limb of the carry lever
would foul the carry finger on the figure wheel if rotated in the wrong direction.

A 25 units more, that is to the end of the 45th unit, and set the even Diff.

Move the axis 1
Fig. wheels 1

Δ.

209

9 Build

The 45-unit point is the even-axis equivalent of the 20-unit point for the odds axis and the same
considerations that apply to the odd differences initial value settings apply.
Move 5 units more, that is to the end of the Cycle of 50, gear the sectors by means of the

F and all is ready for commencing the calculations.

handles 5E and axis 2

This step re-engages the sectors by releasing the lifting handles and re-engages the drive levers
with the sector bars to restore the drive from the cam followers.
Revised Setup Procedure
The setting up procedure was revised to include the use of manual locks to solve the problem of
self-corruption in Babbage’s original sequence. The need to adhere strictly to a fixed stepwise
setting up procedure cannot be overstated. Practically all instances of damage to the machine
arose through inattention during setting up, missing specific steps in the procedures, or
deliberately introducing short-cuts that have proved to have unintended consequences.
The bronze carry levers are particularly vulnerable. During the carry phase of the addition cycle
steel carry arms rotate to service warned figure wheel positions. If a warning is set, the locus of
the steel arm intersects with the position of the bronze carry lever. The action of the steel arm
is to sweep the carry lever aside and in so doing advance the next figure wheel up by one digit.
If the figure wheels are locked, as they are by the manual locks during the setting up procedure,
the bronze carry levers, engaged with the figure wheels by the carry lever horns, cannot move
and the carry arms foul the carry levers. The forces required for the steel carry arms to snap the
bronze carry levers is not sufficient to cause a jam and the carry levers fracture. The backpressure felt in the crank handle is barely noticeable especially in view of the 4:1 reduction gear
in the crank. Continuing to drive the Engine, especially by operators unused to the feel of the
crank during normal operation, can readily strip a warning axis of carry levers.
It is therefore imperative to adhere to each step of the setting up procedure especially as the
procedure relates to the use of the manual locks which have to be withdrawn before a
tabulation is started.
Babbage’s original manuscript description of the setting up procedures calls for two complete
calculation cycles. The first leaves all figure wheels zeroised, and during the second cycle odd
and even difference initial values are entered. Zeroising figure wheels provides the opportunity
for a convenient all-zero visual check of the correct operation of giving-off and carry reset, but
apart from this there is no obvious reason why the first cycle cannot be omitted.

210

9 Build

Both the two-cycle and single-cycle setting up procedures were used, and the single-cycle
version finally adopted. This has been expanded to include, as mentioned, the use of manual
locks, as well as checking procedures to avoid identified pitfalls. The thirty-six-step single-cycle
procedure is detailed with illustrations in the User Manual (2013), Setting up a Calculation, pp
20-31. The procedure includes the provision for setting up an automatic cycle counter that
increments by 1 each time a calculating cycle is completed.
Various checking and diagnostic procedures were developed during the build to systematically
verify correct operation and to diagnose suspected faults. Stepwise procedures are described
and illustrated in the User Manual (2013), Section 7, Trouble Shooting, Diagnostic Tests, pp.
117-124. These include separate procedures for testing the following operations:
1. Carry warning
2. Carry lever locking
3. Carry lever reset
4. Carriage of tens
Systems checks are described as stepwise procedures for:
1. Addition and Carry System Check
2. Secondary-carry Propagation Test.

211

Appendix 10.1: Additional Information

10.1 Additional Information
Engine Logs
1.

Reg Crick’s Logs, Science Museum, London
Throughout the specification and construction of the London Engine detailed logbooks
were kept by Reg Crick, the engineer largely responsible for producing the
manufacturing drawings and for the physical construction of the Engine. The logs are
in desk diaries and notebooks, and chronicle daily activity, problems, solutions, and
progress. They contain detailed technical information, engineering insights, and the
unfolding rationale for actions taken during the construction. Notable amongst these
is ‘The Red Book’ which spans July 1989 to March 1996. As a contemporary chronicle
they are of special interest as events were documented as they happened i.e. in
ignorance of what was to come.

2.

Technical Log for the USA Engine
The logs contain detailed records of technical issues relating to fault-finding, diagnosis,
repair, parts replacement, maintenance and operation. The log includes remedial
action taken to repair the Engine after damage in transit to the USA. From May 2008
till January 2016 the Engine was operated, maintained and repaired by a local
volunteer team led by Tim Robinson at the Computer History Museum, Mountain View,
California where it was on loan for public display and demonstration. The log includes
technical issues resulting from repeated operation over a sustained period of time. The
logs are deposited in the Computer History Museum archive in Institutional Records,
Lot X3711.2007.

Published Works
The following are published works that provide overview, context, and relevant technical and
narrative material.
Bromley, Allan G. "The Evolution of Babbage's Calculating Engines." Annals of the History of
Computing 9.2 (1987): 113-36.
Technical overview of Babbage’s Difference and Analytical Engines. Contains a timeline
of Babbage’s work on calculating Engines.

212

Appendix 10.1: Additional Information

---. The Babbage Papers in the Science Museum: A Cross-Referenced List. London: Science
Museum, 1991.
A printed cross-referenced catalogue of Babbage’s technical archive. This listing
provided the basis for the subsequent re-cataloguing by the Science Museum of the
Babbage papers.
---. "Difference and Analytical Engines." Computing before Computers. Ed. Aspray, William.
Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1990.
Swade, Doron. The Cogwheel Brain: Charles Babbage and the Quest to Build the First
Computer. London: Little, Brown, 2000. US edition: The Difference Engine: Charles
Babbage and the Quest to Build the First Computer. New York: Viking, 2001.
Accessible historical account of Charles Babbage’s efforts to build calculating engines in
the 19th century followed by the modern sequel – a narrative account of the
construction of Difference Engine No. 2 at the Science Museum, London, starting in
1985. Ends with the successful completion of the calculating section in 1991. Does not
include an account of the later construction of the output apparatus.
---. "The 'Unerring Certainty of Mechanical Agency': Machines and Table Making in the
Nineteenth Century." The History of Mathematical Tables: From Sumer to
Spreadsheets. Eds. Campbell-Kelly, Martin, et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
143-74.
---. "Calculation and Tabulation in the 19th Century: George Biddell Airy Versus Charles
Babbage." PhD. University College London, 2003.
---. "The Construction of Charles Babbage's Difference Engine No. 2." IEEE Annals of the
History of Computing 27.3 (2005): 70-88.
---. "'Photographing the Footsteps of Time': Space and Time in Charles Babbage's Calculating
Engines." Space, Time, and the Limits of Human Understanding. Ed. Shyam Wuppuluri,
Giancarlo Ghirardi: Springer, 2017. 417-27.
---. "George Biddell Airy, Greenwich and the Utility of Calculating Engines." Mathematics at
the Meridian: The History of Mathematics at Greenwich Ed. Tony Mann, Raymond
Flood, Mary Croarken: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2020. 63-81.

213

Appendix 10.1: Additional Information

Nineteenth Century
Babbage, Charles. "On a Method of Expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery." Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 116
(1826): 250-65. Reprinted in: Babbage's Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers: A

Collection of Papers Relating to Them; Their History, and Construction. Ed. Babbage,
Henry Prevost. London: Spon, 1889. 236-41. Reprinted in: The Works of Charles
Babbage. Ed. Campbell-Kelly, Martin. Vol. 3. London: William Pickering, 1989. 209-23.
---. Laws of Mechanical Notation, Chapter I: On Lettering Drawings: [Privately printed], 1851.
Reprinted in: Babbage's Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers Relating to Them;
Their History, and Construction. Ed. Babbage, Henry Prevost. London: E. and F. N. Spon,
1889. 242-57. Reprinted in: The Works of Charles Babbage. Ed. Campbell-Kelly, Martin.
Vol. 3. London: Pickering, 1989. 224-8.
Babbage, Henry Prevost. "On Mechanical Notation, as Exemplified in the Swedish Calculating
Machine of Messrs. Scheutz." British Association. September (1855). Reprinted in:
Babbage's Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers Relating to Them; Their History,
and Construction. Ed. Babbage, Henry Prevost. London: Spon, 1889. 246-7.
---. "Scheutz's Difference Engine, and Babbage's Mechanical Notation." Minutes of
Proceedings of Civil Engineers. May (1856). Reprinted in: Babbage's Calculating
Engines: A Collection of Papers: A Collection of Papers Relating to Them; Their History,
and Construction. Ed. Babbage, Henry Prevost. London: Spon, 1889. 248-257.

Videos and Simulations
Five excellent explanatory simulations by Mike Hilton of Difference Engine No. 2 mechanisms
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLSOxgHhh6-o8ZuhRpL9ds8wM4doxauruVideo of model, by Piers Plummer, of section of Difference Engine No. 2 calculating
mechanism driven by a steam engine.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t8aYkow-Fv8

214

Appendix 10.2: Archive Drawings

10.2 Archive Drawings
The twenty main drawings for Difference Engine No. 2 are part of the series of drawings for the
Analytical Engine identified by Babbage with the prefix [A].
The Babbage papers were recatalogued by the Science Museum following digitisation in 2011.
The drawing numbers in the list that follows are those used in the new catalogue. The drawing
titles are the full form taken directly from the original drawings held by the Science Museum.
In addition to the twenty main drawings listed of which images are provided here, the archive
contains drawings of superseded designs, selected derivative tracings, and Notations. These are
of historical and technical interest but are not included here as they played no appreciable part
in the interpretation of the main designs though there are occasional references to them in the
course of the account and the images are available online.
The full archive of Babbage papers is available online at:
http://collection.sciencemuseum.org.uk/documents/aa110000003/the-babbage-papers
Citation convention
The digitized images of the main drawings for Difference Engine No, 2 are identified by
descriptors of the following general form:
BAB/X/YYY/Z
where X is a letter (identifying a class or set or related drawings), YYY a three-digit number and
Z a single-digit number.
Because of the frequency with which the twenty main drawings are cited in the text the BAB/
prefix has been omitted but only for the twenty main drawings listed here and for which
images are included in this Appendix. So in the text BAB/A/163 is cited as A/163. For other
than the twenty main drawings the full descriptor is used i.e. including ‘BAB/’ prefix – this to
assist with identifying images online.
The second major class of drawings is that of the Construction Drawings, a set of 219 drawings
specifying the 8,000 parts of the machine. All citations of the Construction Drawings are in full
i.e. they are all prefixed with 337/ – this to disambiguate them from Babbage’s original
drawings some of which share the same class number as the Construction Drawings.

215

Appendix 10.2: Archive Drawings

Main Mechanical Drawings for Difference Engine No. 2
BAB/A/147

Stereotype frames for Analytical and Difference Engines, January 1847.
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000290

BAB/A/159

General Plan and Details of Cams for Driving Calculating Axes also the
Disconnecting Apparatus 3K First Mover [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000302

BAB/A/160

[Elevation] [Untitled, undated. Table of Symbols on reverse]
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000303

BAB/A/161

General Plan and Detail of the Driving of the Calculating part of Diff[eren]ce
Engine No. 2 [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000304

BAB/A/162

Part of Frame for Supporting Stereotype axes [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000305

BAB/A/163

Elevation of Difference Engine No. 2 (1/4 size) for Plan see No. 2.
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000306

BAB/A/164

Plan of Difference Engine No. 2 (1/4 size) [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000307

BAB/A/165

[Figs] 6 & 7 End View and Elevation of Paper Rollers [undated]
[Figs] 4 & 5 End View and Plan of Carrying axis and Driver

C.

[Figs] 1 & 2 End View and Elevation of Supports to end of same Parts in axis 4
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000308

BAB/A/166

Apparatus for moving Stereotype frames for Analytical & Difference Engines. Half
real size [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000309

BAB/A/167

Elevation and End View of Part of General Framing [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000310

BAB/A/168

Plan and End View of Cams etc for Vertical Motion to Calculating axes [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000311

BAB/A/169

Plan of Cams for Locking Odd Difference Fig[u]re Wheels and for Vertical motion
of even Difference warn[in]g [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000312

BAB/A/170

Plan of Cams for Circ[ula]r Mot[io]n of Even Diff[eren]ce Axes [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000313

BAB/A/171

Difference Engine No. 2 Addition Carriage and mode of Driving the Axes
[undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000314

BAB/A/172

End view of Inking Printing Paper and Stereotype Apparatus [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000315

216

Appendix 10.2: Archive Drawings

BAB/A/173

Plan of Inking Printing and Stereotype Apparatus [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000316

BAB/A/174

Rack Pinions for connecting Table fig[ure] wheels with Printing Stereotype
Sectors [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000317

BAB/A/175

Plan of Cams for Punching with small stereotype sectors, and Cams for removing
Paper Rollers [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000318

BAB/A/176

Plan of Calculating part of Difference Engine with the means of conveying
numbers to Stereotype sectors [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000319

BAB [A] 177 Difference Engine No. 2. Bars and Levers for lifting Axes, Plan [undated].
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110000320

Timing Diagram
BAB/F/385/1 Notation of Units for Difference Engine No. 2, March 1848.
https://collection.sciencemuseumgroup.org.uk/documents/aa110001315

217

Appendix 10.3: Construction Drawings

10.3 Construction Drawings
The construction drawings consist of piece-part drawings that specify the manufacturing details
for the 8,000 parts of the Engine. The set includes General Assembly drawings showing how
collections of parts are combined into mechanisms.
There are 219 construction drawings arranged in thirteen sets:
A

Base and Transport Bracing; and Calculation (Trial Piece)

B

Circular Motion: Drive and Control

C

Calculation (see also A above, Trial Piece)

D

Drive

E

Vertical Motions

F

Framework

G

Mobile Showcase

J

Electronic Printout Mounting

K

Printing

L

Stereotype Printing

M

Modifications to Output Apparatus

X

Trial Piece Control, Timing Diagram, , Matrix Pan Formats, Travelling Platform Control,
Mirrored Layout

Miscellaneous: Developmental Drawings
Citation Convention
Part numbers specified in the construction drawings take the general form:
337 P XXZ A
where
-

337 is the project number and is the same for all the drawings

-

P is the Series letter of a class or set of related drawings (one of the letters listed
above).

-

XX is a two-digit number of a sheet that typically specifying several related parts

-

Z is a single-digit number identifying a specific part on a sheet (there are never more
than 10 details on a sheet).

-

A is a detail and/or variation, typically A or B

For example: 337 X 21 is the Timing Diagram in the set of Series X drawings. It is a single view
with no additional detail or variation (Timing Diagram is shown on p. 221).
218

Appendix 10.3: Construction Drawings

Notes
1. Parts for Calculation are split between Series A and C. The reasons are historical: the Trial
Piece was built before the main Engine to verify the altered layout for mirroring of alternate
axes. So the Trial Piece required specification of key components for addition and carriage
including figure wheels, sector wheels, carry arms and carry levers, and locks. These were
the first parts for which manufacturing drawings were produced and the drawings were
identified as Series A. The A series-letter was later appropriated for Base and Transport
Bracing. The A-series drawings relating to Calculation were not redrawn for inclusion in
Series-C, nor were they relabelled. So the content of Series A is anomalously mixed but the
Trial Piece drawings are in a their own folder in Series-A.
2. Series J and Trial Piece Control (in Series X) are experimental and speculative without any
direct bearing on the machine as built. Series J relates to the mounts for an electronic
readout of the figure wheels. The idea was to instrument automatic readout from the figure
wheel axis to a computer for checking results. In the event the mechanical computations
were found to be more reliable than the electronic verification. The apparatus was
implemented experimentally and subsequently abandoned. The Trial Piece Control drawings
(in Series X) are plans for automatic cycling of the Trial Piece using an electronmechanical
drive intended for unattended visitor operation. This was not implemented. Manual
operation for demonstration was preferred.
3. Project number prefix: Rhoden Partners Ltd, a specialist engineering company, was
commissioned to prepare drawings for the Trial Piece, a manually operated model to test
the layout modification featuring the mirrored layout of alternate calculating axes (Fig.
3.14). Rhoden allocated 337 as the project number as part of its internal numbering system.
When Rhoden went into receivership in 1990, the Science Museum hired two Rhoden
engineers, Reg Crick and Barrie Holloway, to complete the project in house. The 337
project-number was retained as the project prefix in all subsequent drawings
notwithstanding Rhoden’s demise.

219

Appendix 10.4: Parts Lists

10.4 Parts Lists
Parts lists are used in conjunction with the Construction Drawings listed in Appendix 10.3.
The Parts Lists specify:
1.

The part number as identified in the Series drawings.

2.

How many of each part are required.

3.

Description or name of the part.

There are five Parts Lists for the construction drawings.
The five lists collectively run to 74 sheets of A4.
The Parts Lists were checked and amended in October 2008 after the completion of the US
Engine.

220

Appendix 10.5 Timing Diagram

221
Timing Diagram 337 X 21

221

11 Picture Credits

11 Picture Credits
The Science Museum holds exclusive rights to all illustrations, tables and diagrams with the
following exceptions:
Fig. 8.1 page 198 by kind permission of Tim Robinson.
Frontispiece (elevation of Difference Engine No. 2), Fig. 1.2 page 7, Fig. 4.2 page 52, Fig. 4.5
page 55, Fig. 5.1 page 71 Doron Swade.

222

