Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2
User Manual

Doron D Swade
London
March 2020

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2
Science Museum
London

© Board of Trustees of the Science Museum

Contents

Contents
Scope and Purpose

5

1.

Introduction

6

2.
2.1
2.2
2.3

Overview
Control Unit
Calculating Section
Output Apparatus

7
8
10
12

3.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Operating the Engine
Turning the crank
Edging towards a timing point
Tips and Cautions
Jams

15
15
17
18
19

4.
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5

Setting up a Calculation
Initial values
Checking results
Entering initial values
Automatic cycle counting
Variations

20
20
22
23
31
33

5.
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4

Operating the Output Apparatus
Overview
Printing
Stereotyping
Uncoupling the drive

36
36
37
47
64

6.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Maintenance and Repair
Replacing parts on an axis
Lubrication
Cleaning
Special Tools

70
70
80
99
101

7.
7.1
7.2
7.3

Trouble Shooting
Damage and parts failure
Clearing jams
Diagnostic tests

106
106
108
117

Contents

8.
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5

Moving the Engine
Overview
Bracing the Engine
Securing loose parts
Jacking up and moving
Additional precautions

127
127
129
133
135
136

9.

Specification

139

10. Appendices
10.1 Timing Diagram
10.2 Setting-up Check List
10.3 State of Engine Table
10.4 Stereotyping Layout Options

140
141
143
145

11.

Acknowledgements

146

12.

Picture Credits

147

Scope and Purpose

Scope and Purpose
This Manual describes practical procedures for the operation and maintenance of Charles
Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2.
It is intended as a free-standing document to enable a user to set up a demonstration
calculation, operate, and maintain the Engine.
It is also intended as a training aid for prospective demonstrators and maintenance personnel.
Technical explanations of how the mechanisms work have been kept to a minimum and offered
only where they affect operational procedures. Emphasis is on practical action and guidance
rather than on design rationale or history.
Common faults are identified and remedial action described. It is not possible to foresee all the
ways in which the machine may stray from true in time given that these are experimental
machines. However a range of detailed diagnostic checks is provided as well as a remedial guide
for the most common faults.
There is a companion document Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: Technical
Description (2020) that is intended as an aid to understanding of the kind necessary for faultfinding, diagnosis and repair of faults not covered here. It features a detailed analysis of the
original design, explanation of the working of the Engine’s mechanisms, and implementation
details.
The deeper an understanding of the Engine an operator has the better, but the Technical
Description is not a prerequisite for using this Manual as a guide to operating and routinely
servicing the Engine, and pre-empting damage.
By following the procedures described in this Manual, setting up calculations, operating and
maintaining the Engine can safely be undertaken by those without mechanical or engineering
expertise. But the repair procedures described here should not be undertaken by anyone not
knowledgeable or confident about mechanisms and machines, or by anyone not already familiar
with the Engine.
The contents of this User Manual apply equally to the first Engine completed at the Science
Museum in 2002, and to the second Engine constructed for shipment to the USA, completed in
2008.

5

1 Introduction

1. Introduction

Charles Babbage’s drawings for Difference Engine No. 2 date from 1847 to 1849. Babbage made
no attempt to construct the Engine and the machine remained unbuilt for some 140 years.
A team at the Science Museum, London, constructed a full working Engine completed in 2002.
The calculating section was completed in 1991 for the bicentenary of Babbage’s birth. The
output apparatus for printing and stereotyping results, which is an integral part of the machine
and is described in the original designs, was completed in March 2002.
A second Engine was built for Nathan Myhrvold, a private collector, who also funded the
construction of the output apparatus for the London Engine. This was completed in London in
2008 and transported to the United States to the Computer History Museum, California in that
year.
While there are minor differences in the two machines, they were made to be identical, and at
the time of writing the procedures described here apply equally to both machines.
Babbage left no written explanation of his design or his thinking, nor did he leave any
operational instructions. His journals, called ‘Scribbling Books’, have intermittent relevant
entries made during the design, and he left a short note on the procedure for setting up a
calculation. But these records are few, fragmentary and unsystematic.
The operating and maintenance procedures described in this User Manual draw on a detailed
analysis of the original design drawings, the construction of two Engines, and the operation and
maintenance of the Engine over many years.
Both Engines have been used for countless live demonstrations and the calculating section is
well tested. Certain configurations of the printing and stereotyping apparatus have been
exercised, and experimental stereotyping using plaster of Paris has been successfully carried
out. However, at the time of writing, all permutations of the formatting options have not been
comprehensively exercised.

6

2 Overview

2. Overview
Difference Engine No. 2 automatically calculates and tabulates a class of mathematical functions
(polynomials). It prints results in inked hardcopy and impresses them in trays of soft material for the
production of printing plates in a process called stereotyping. The Engine is shown in Fig. 2.1 in one
of Babbage’s drawings that is most illustrative of its overall form.

Fig. 2.1: Difference Engine No. 2, Elevation c. 1848 (A163) .

The whole machine measures eleven feet long and seven feet high with the depth varying between
eighteen inches and four feet as shown in plan (Fig. 2.2). The built Engine weighs five tonnes and
consists of a total of 8,000 parts.

Fig. 2.2: Difference Engine No. 2, Plan, c. 1848. (A164).

7

2 Overview

The Engine is operated by turning the crank, shown on the right, by hand. Each full cycle of the
Engine produces the next result in the table.
The Engine has three main sections:
1. Control Unit
2. Calculating Section
3. Output Apparatus
Results
Column

st

1 Difference
Column

Stereotyping
Printing
Apparatus
Apparatus
Output
Apparatus

th

4 Difference
Column

Calculating
Section

th

7 Difference
Column

Control
Unit

Fig. 2.3: Difference Engine No. 2, Main Elevation showing three main subsections (A163).

2.1 Control Unit
The Control Unit consists of the main crank and the cam stack. The Engine is operated by
turning the crank by hand. The crank drives a set of twenty-eight cams (two pairs of fourteen)
arranged in a vertical stack shown immediately alongside. The rotating cams drive and
synchronise the lifting, turning and sliding motions required by the calculating mechanism. Each
complete cycle of the Engine produces the next result in the tabulation sequence.
8

2 Overview

The crank handle also drives the printer and stereotype apparatus through a long shaft running
the length of the underside of the machine and driven by a large bevel gear on the underside of
the cam stack.
A chapter disc on the main drive shows where the Engine is in the timing sequence of each
calculating cycle. The position of the Engine in the timing cycle is indicated by a pointer and can
be read from the chapter disc at any time (Fig. 2.4).

Pointer

Fig. 2.4
Chapter disc
and pointer
indicating
position in
the timing
cycle.

Chapter disc

Cam stack

Crank handle

Babbage divided the calculating cycle into fifty units so each of Babbage’s units corresponds to
7.2º in a 360º cycle. The disc is engraved with graduations and numbers at five-unit intervals (0,
5, 15 etc) with each five-unit interval corresponding to 36º. Key events in the cycle are engraved
with labels: ‘FULL CYCLE’ (zero), ‘SET ODD’ (20 units), ‘HALF CYCLE’ (25), and ‘SET EVEN’ (45).
The chapter disc is used to set the machine at the start of the cycle (zero on the chapter disc)
and to advance to particular points in the cycle when setting up initial values. It is also used for
debugging – indicating the position in the timing cycle of a jam, for example.
The output apparatus has its own local control unit in which a vertical set of cams controls the
internal operations and timing for printing and stereotyping.
9

2 Overview

2.2 Calculating Section
The Calculating Section consists of two parts: the upper section consist of eight columns of
figure wheels.
The lower section consists of the drive links, levers, and racks that produce the lifting and
turning motions for the vertical axes. The mechanisms are driven by the rotation of the cams in
the cam stack. The calculating section and control unit together consist of 4,000 parts.
Number values are represented by

Fig. 2.5

figure wheels engraved with the
numbers ‘0’ through ‘9’. Each wheel

Figure
wheel.
One of
248.

has four decades of decimal digits
engraved on the barrel i.e. ‘0’ through
‘9’ repeated four times (Fig. 2.5).
Warning nibs (4)

Barrel

Drive nibs (4)

Figure wheels are arranged in vertical stacks or columns. Each figure wheel column, also called a
figure wheel axis, has thirty-one figure wheels, one for each of the thirty-one digits.
Digit values can be read by eye directly from the figure wheels. Immediately above each wheel
is an engraved cursor which faces front and acts as a pointer (Fig.2.6). The cursors are used to
read the number values when setting up the initial values at the start of a calculation, verifying
correct arithmetical operation, and fault-finding.
In each column the least significant
digit is at the bottom, the most
significant digit at the top i.e. units
are represented by the lowermost

Figure
wheel
column

figure wheel, tens the next wheel up
and so on. The right-most column
th

holds the value of the 7 difference,

Readout
Cursors

the 6th difference is on the column
alongside to the left and so on. The
result appears on the left-most
column, the results column (Fig. 2.3,
p. 8).

Fig. 2.6: Cursors showing figure wheel
values.
10

2 Overview

The 7th, 5th, 3rd, and 1st difference columns are the odd difference columns. The 6th, 4th, and
2nd difference columns are the even difference columns.
For each calculating cycle the Engine adds the value on the 7th difference column to the value
on the 6th difference column, the 6th to the 5th and so on with information moving from right to
left. The result of these additions, the tabular value, appears on the last column on the left, the
results column.
The initial values of the calculation are entered by hand using a fixed sequence of steps. Initial
values are entered on the figure wheels from a table calculated specifically for the function
being tabulated. After setting initial values each subsequent cycle of the Engine produces each
next value in the table of the function being tabulated.
The number of cycles the Engine has completed can be read from an index counter set up on a
few of the figure wheels. Three or four figure wheels are usually used for this giving a three- or
four-digit count. Each cycle of the Engine increments the count by one. If the calculation is set
up to start 𝑥 = 0 then the index counter shows the value of 𝑥 for each tabular result that

follows.

If the index counter is set up at the top of the results column then it will be printed out as the
leading digits of each result. If the start value of the index is set at the starting value of 𝑥 then
the value of 𝑥 (the argument in the table) will be printed and stereotyped as leading digits in
line with the value of the function for that value of 𝑥.

The tabular value on the results column is automatically transferred to the output apparatus on
the left for printing and stereotyping.
Only 30 of the 31 digits of the result are transferred to the printer so digit 31 (the highest value
digit) will not be printed or stereotyped.
The machine can calculate and tabulate any polynomial up to the 7th order using repeated
addition according to the method of finite differences.
For polynomials of order less than seven the higher order difference columns are set to zero
and play no part. The Engine, once run in, produces a 31-digit result every eight seconds when
run at the recommended normal speed.

11

2 Overview

2.3 Output Apparatus

The output apparatus is an integral part of the machine and is part of the original design. The
whole apparatus consists of 4000 parts and is bolted to the main frame of the calculating
section (Fig. 2.7).
Fig. 2.7: Output apparatus for stereotyping and printing.

Inking
System

Paper
Roll
Travelling
Platform

Falling
Weight
Rewind
Handle

Falling
Weight

Auxiliary
Crank

Pattern
Wheels

End of Page
Trip Cradle

The apparatus automatically typesets results, prints an inked copy of each result on a paper roll,
and produces stereotype moulds by impressing the results into soft material in trays (Figs. 2.8,
2.9).
The output apparatus consists of two sections (Fig. 2.3). The printing apparatus contains the
inking apparatus, the paper roll, and printwheels.

12

2 Overview

The section below is the stereotyping apparatus. Punch wheels are lowered once each cycle to
impress each new result into soft material in the trays below. The trays are fixed to travelling
platforms that automatically reposition the trays under the punch wheels for each new result.

Fig. 2.8: Inked hardcopy (experimental).

Fig. 2.9: Stereotype moulds in Plaster of Paris.

There are two trays, one larger than the other and two sets of punch wheels with different font
sizes. The platforms are driven by falling weights.
The format of the stereotyped results can be programmed. The line height, number of lines,
margin widths, and number of columns of results can be preset using pattern wheels. Blank
lines can be left between groups of lines for ease of reading.
The stereotyping apparatus can impress results across the page (column-to-column) or down
the page (line-to-line). In the case of column-to-column format, line wrap at the end of the line
is automatic. Similarly, in the case of line-to-line format, fly back to the top of page at the end of
a column of results is automatic (see Figs. 5.19, 5.20, p. 48).
The output apparatus is directly coupled to the calculating section and each new thirty-digit
tabular value is transferred automatically from the results column, via a system of racks, pinions
and spindles, to the output apparatus for printing and stereotyping.
The output apparatus prints and stereotypes thirty of the thirty-one digits of the result (Figs.
2.8, 2.9). The highest value digit occupying the topmost figure wheel in the result column is not
transferred and therefore not printed or stereotyped.
The whole output mechanism is driven from a main drive shaft running along the underside of
the Engine from the control unit. There is a separate set of cams local to the output apparatus
that drives the internal motions of parts and orchestrates the timing of operations.
13

2 Overview

A feedback mechanism from the output apparatus to the calculating section automatically halts
the Engine at the end of a stereotyped page to prevent overrun. The communication between
the end-of-page stop trip and the crank is through a cat-gut cable routed via pulleys.
The end-of-page halting ensures that the first new result on the fresh tray is the next result in
the sequence and that no results are lost in the changeover.
The travelling platforms automatically position the trays under the punch wheels to receive
each new result. The travelling platforms are driven by two sets of falling weights. One set (on
the right in Fig. 2.7) drives the line-to-line movement. The set on the left drives the column-tocolumn movement.
When stereotyping down the page (line-to-line) the line-to-line falling weight is automatically
rewound and a new column can be started without interruption. At the end of a full page the
column-to-column falling weight is rewound by hand using the rewind handle (Fig 2.7). When
stereotyping across the page the column-to-column falling weight is rewound automatically and
at end of page the line-to-line falling weight is rewound by hand.

14

3 Operating the Engine

3.

Operating the Engine
The Engine is operated by turning the crank handle. In normal operation the Engine is cycled
repeatedly through a sequence of full cycles.
For entering initial values before a calculation, repair, adjustment and fault-finding, the Engine
is typically advanced from stand-still through only part of a cycle, or incrementally.
NEVER FORCE THE HANDLE IF IT FAILS TO TURN WITH GENTLE FIRM PRESSURE

3.1 Turning the Handle – Recommended Technique
The first principle of operating the Engine is never to force the crank if there is an obstacle to
turning, or unexpected resistance.
The watchword of correct cranking is to turn firmly and
Chapter
disc

evenly.

4:1 Reduction
gear

The resistance to turning is not constant during the cycle.
There are sharp shock-loads at various points in the cycle.
These occur at 0, 10, 25 and 35 units as indicated on the
chapter disc in clear view of the operator (Fig. 3.1). Once the
Engine is run-in the resistance to turning the handle between
these points in the cycle is low.
The tendency is to turn faster when the load is light and
slower when the shock loads are felt or to turn faster in
anticipation of one of the periodic shock loads. This tendency
should be resisted. Firm even pressure and uniform rate of

Fig. 3.1: Main crank.

turning through the sudden load points is the surest way to
operating the Engine safely and effectively.
Cranking too fast or too slowly are the most common causes of jams.
It takes a little practice to get a feel for what to expect.

15

3 Operating the Engine

RECOMMENDED CRANKING SPEED = FOUR TURNS IN EIGHT SECONDS
ONE TURN IN 2 SECONDS

Four turns take the Engine through one complete calculating cycle. These figures apply when
the handle is installed as shown in Fig. 3.1 i.e. with the 4:1 reduction gear fitted which is
standard. A steady rate of 2 seconds per turn is the recommended rate.

A new operator should not be permitted to turn the crank without instruction or
awareness of the recommended technique.

The recommended stance is shown in Fig. 3.2.
Brace legs and body comfortably preferably
with one foot in front.
Grip the handle with both hands. Keep arms
firm but not rigid, and flexed at the elbows.
The handle turns clockwise to drive the Engine
as viewed in the illustration above. There is no
danger in turning it the wrong way: it is fitted
with a ratchet and freewheels if turned anticlockwise.
It is recommended to start with the handle at
around 6 o’clock, its lowest point.
The reason for this is that more of the shock

Fig. 3.2: Recommended stance.

loads occur when the handle is on the down stroke i.e. being drawn towards the operator and
this motion is easier to control than pushing the handle away at chest height.
To return the handle to 6-o’clock turn it anti-clockwise as seen in Fig. 3.2. The crank will freewheel on the ratchet and you will hear a clicking sound (made by the ratchet pawl).

16

3 Operating the Engine

The direction of rotation is clockwise to drive the Engine. Draw the handle towards you and
continue turning clockwise with a firm and steady action.
Keep an even steady speed throughout. Use back, legs and arms in a coordinated rocking
motion for evenness and to lessen tiring.
Halt the Engine at zero (FULL CYCLE) when completing a normal run. This is recommended but
not essential. Avoid halting just before or at the shock loads. These occur at 0, 10, 25, and 35
units.

3.2 Edging towards a Timing Point
There are several situations in which it is necessary to advance the Engine from standstill to a
particular point in the timing cycle. Returning the Engine to zero after maintenance or repair,
advancing the Engine to particular points during setting up initial values, for fault finding or
adjustment and repair, are examples.
Without the momentum and rhythm of full turns it is difficult to halt the Engine at an exact
timing point. Even with full turning under way it is easy to slightly over- or under-run the
intended stopping point. There is a recommended technique for advancing the Engine to a
particular timing point.
Recommended Technique for Advancing to a Timing Point
1. Take up the recommended stance.
2. If the handle is not at 6-o’clock, return it to 6-o’clock by turning anti-clockwise. The handle
free-wheels on the ratchet and you will hear the ratchet clicking. Stop the handle at 6o’clock.
3. Push the handle very slowly anti-clockwise (away from you) past at least one ratchet click.
4. Draw the handle gently towards you so that the handle is back at 6-o’clock. This advances
the cycle a small controllable amount. Do not under any circumstances force the handle
against a jam or unexpected resistance.
5. Repeat this operation to advance the cycle by increments until the required timing point is
reached as indicated on the chapter disk.

17

3 Operating the Engine

The rationale for this incremental method is to make small movements that can be well
controlled. Drawing the crank towards you at about waist height using small movements
allows good physical control.

3.3 Tips and Cautions
Never force the handle.
Do not turn faster when the load is lighter. Especially do not speed up in anticipation of the
shock loads with a view to building up speed to drive through them. This is bad practice and
will jam the mechanism.
There is an additional resistance between 26 and 35 units when values from the results
column are transferred to the output apparatus. The amount of resistance is data dependent
i.e. depends on how many numbers there are in the result. The larger the value of the result
the more figure wheels with non-zero participate in the transfer and the stiffness felt at the
crank is proportionately higher.
Shock loads should be anticipated by firmer action at constant speed.
Turn at an even rate of four turns in eight seconds. This is the single most important guiding
principle next to never forcing the handle against a jam or unexpected resistance.
Turning too slowly through caution or inexperience tends to jam the mechanism. Turning too
fast can be relied on to cause jams.
Turning too fast tends to cause a jam that is usually easy to clear (see Section 7, Trouble
Shooting). Turning too slowly can cause a jam that is more difficult to clear.
The Engine can be halted without risk at points in the cycle other than zero. But do not halt
just before, or at, any of 10, 25, or 35 units in the timing cycle. These are the points in the cycle
when there are shock loads caused by the locks being driven in.
If the Engine is halted just before or at these timing points, it will be difficult to drive the
handle evenly from cold start when turning is resumed. The transition through these points

18

3 Operating the Engine

will be too slow and probably uneven without a built up turning rhythm and momentum, and
non-trivial jams in these circumstances are commonplace.
For this reason it is recommended that the last full cycle is completed in its entirety and the
Engine is halted at zero (FULL CYCLE).

3.4 Jams
The Engine is designed to jam if the integrity of the calculation is compromised.
Turning the handle to avoid jams is an acquired technique and it is important to turn the crank
through these sudden load-points at an even rate.
Turning the crank against unexpected resistance runs the risk of breakages, distortion, or
derangement of settings. Always err on the side of caution. Never force the handle, or turn it
against unexpected resistance.
STOP AND INVESTIGATE

By and large the Engine is robust. But there is a set of delicate and relatively brittle parts (carry
levers) in the mechanism for carrying tens that is not strong enough to jam the Engine if they
foul. Insensitive cranking can fracture these levers. Continuing to turn can strip a complete set.
Damage of this kind is not trivial to fix. Replacing a carry lever requires expensive spares, at
least two people, and knowledge of the procedure which takes 1-2 days to complete.
To avoid breakages and damage there is no substitute for correct, sensitive and alert cranking
by the operator and a fast reaction to stop cranking if anything untoward is suspected.
Common jams, procedures for clearing them, as well as diagnostic tests for malfunctions are
provided in Section 7, Trouble Shooting.

19

4 Setting up a Calculation

4.

Setting Up a Calculation
4.1 Initial Values
At the start of a calculation the initial values are set by hand on the figure wheels. The setting
up process follows a detailed and exact procedure.
The initial values are set from a pre-calculated table for the particular calculation being
performed.
The polynomial used here for demonstration purposes is:
𝑦(𝑥) = 8𝑥 7 + 2𝑥 6 + 9𝑥 5 + 5𝑥 4 + 𝑥 3 + 7𝑥 2 + 4𝑥 + 41.

There is no special significance to this function except that it is a full seventh-order polynomial
and so uses all eight figure wheel axes i.e. the full capacity of the machine. It has only positive
coefficients so that for positive values of 𝑥 all results are positive and all powers of 𝑥 are

present so it is a general form.

The Engine is capable of repeated addition only. Negative values are represented in the Engine
using tens complements. The use of complements allows a number to be subtracted from
another using addition of positive numbers only.
In the demonstration example positive coefficients and positive values of 𝑥 have been used to

avoid the need for subtraction and the use of complements. This is for simplicity of
demonstration only.

There is also an historical reason for using positive values. Complements tend to involve lots of
‘9’s and this creates larger loads on the mechanism. The function shown above is the first
function tabulated on the Engine and has been used for demonstrations since. The first tests
on the Engine were confined to positive values as a staging point in bringing the Engine to full
working, and the practice has stuck.
The Engine is designed to tabulate any polynomial up to the seventh order with positive or
negative coefficients. If the highest order is less than seven the higher order difference
columns are not used i.e. not all the figure wheel columns will be active.
A table of initial values needs to be prepared for each different function. A new table of initial
values is also needed if the function is unchanged but with a different starting value of 𝑥. The
20

4 Setting up a Calculation

general procedure for preparing these tables is described in a companion volume Difference
Engine No. 2: Technical Description (2013).

Table of Initial Values
The initial values for the chosen function are shown in the table below. Column D7 shows the
value of the 7th difference and is set up on the right-most column. D6 is the 6th difference value
and is set up on11the next column to the left and so on. The first tabular value is shown in
column T. This is the value of the equation for 𝑥 = 0 and is the first result (= 41).
𝑦(𝑥) = 8𝑥 7 + 2𝑥 6 + 9𝑥 5 + 5𝑥 4 + 𝑥 3 + 7𝑥 2 + 4𝑥 + 41
T

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

1
1

D7
4

5

1

0

4

3

2

4

3

4

3

2

6

6

4

4

2

1

6

8

4

0

0

0

0

T

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

D7

4
0
3
2
0

Fig. 4.1: Initial Values

21

4 Setting up a Calculation

Numbers are set up with the least significant digit (units) at the bottom of the column, tens on
the next wheel up, hundreds the next and so on. The 7th difference is the number 40,320
(forty-thousand, three-hundred and twenty). The initial values are set up on the digit wheels
using a fixed sequence of steps described in Section 4.3, Entering Initial Values, p. 23.

4.2 Checking Results
The following table (Fig. 4.2) gives some results for the equation used for demonstration. Once
initial values are set, and the Engine is operational, the table below can be used for checking
results.

𝒚(𝒙) = 𝟖𝒙 𝟕 + 𝟐𝒙 𝟔 + 𝟗𝒙 𝟓 + 𝟓𝒙 𝟒 +
𝒙

𝒙 𝟑 + 𝟕𝒙 𝟐 + 𝟒𝒙 + 𝟒 𝟏

Tabular Value (T)

0

41

1

77

2

1605

3

21689

4

149993

5

687861

6

2409797

7

6987665

8

17617929

9

39892253

10

82951781

15

1396748801

20

10397610921

30

176640783461

40

1319846475401

50

6284093892741

60

22495255441481

70

66133984727621

80

168326144557161

90

383753874936101

100

802090501070441

Fig. 4.2: Result Verification.
22

4 Setting up a Calculation

For checking purposes the value of 𝑥 is read from the index counter that is set up as part of

setting initial values. The result or tabular value is read from the figure wheels in the results
column, units at the bottom, tens next above and so on. The digit value on each figure wheel is
read at the cursor above each figure wheel (see Fig. 2.6, p. 10).
In the demonstration example, the start value of 𝑥 is zero. If the index counter is set to zero

then the counter will register the number of cycles the Engine has run and this represents at
the same time the value of 𝑥.

If a non-zero start value of 𝑥 is required then the counter can be set either to zero or the non-

zero start value. If set to zero the counter registers the number of cycles. If set to the non-zero
at the start with the appropriate increment, the counter registers the value of 𝑥 for each result

produced and this will be printed and stereotyped on the same line as the corresponding
result.

In the setting up tables provided for the demonstration example, the start value of 𝑥 is zero.

The index counter registers the number of cycles the Engine has run and this corresponds to
the value of 𝑥.

4.3 Entering Initial Values
The setting up procedure consists of an exact sequence of operations that allow the initial
values to be set on the figure wheels by hand.
For demonstration purposes the Engine does not have to be reset each time it is run. The
tabulation can simply continue from where it was last stopped.
There are a total of 248 figure wheels. Starting with low values of 𝑥 reduces the number of

figure wheels that require setting. In the case of the example used here only twenty seven of
the 248 wheels need to be set.

There are several mechanisms designed to prevent the values on the figure wheels being
corrupted whether the machine is in use or at rest. These security devices are an essential part
of the original design and are intended to protect the integrity of the calculation.
The security devices are mainly wedge-shaped locks that are inserted between the teeth of
gear wheels at various times in the timing cycle. The locks immobilise the wheels to prevent
derangement during periods that the wheels are inactive. The locks also provide error
23

4 Setting up a Calculation

detection and a measure of self correction. If a figure wheel is in an indeterminate position the
lock cannot enter between the teeth and the Engine jams.
Jamming is a warning that the calculation has been compromised.
With the Engine in a fully functional state (i.e. free of jams) the figure wheel s cannot be
turned freely by hand without disabling the security locks.
The setting up procedure is an exact sequence of operations that disables the locks and allows
the figure wheels to be turned so that the initial values can be set and then held without
alteration until tabulation starts.
The odd difference columns are set first at one point in the cycle. The even difference columns
and the results column are set at a later point in the cycle.

Single-Cycle Setup Procedure
The following is the step-wise procedure for setting up initial values using the single-cycle
setting up sequence.
The procedure is exact and should not be deviated from.

WARNING
DO NOT DEVIATE IN FROM THE SETTING UP SEQUENCE DESCRIBED
It is important not to deviate from the fixed sequence described. Resist temptation to take
short cuts by omitting any of the steps. The sequence for engaging and disengaging the
manual setting locks is critical. If a setting lock is left engaged the figure wheels are
immobilised and the steel carry arms will snap the bronze carry levers during the carry cycle.
It is possible to strip an entire carry column in this way. Practically all damage and breakages
suffered over twenty years resulted from deviating from the strict stepwise sequence of
operations described. Confidence comes with experience and with it the temptation to omit
what appear to be unnecessary steps. Don’t.

24

4 Setting up a Calculation

A short-form checklist with single-line instructions is provided in Appendix 10.2, p. 141.
The checklist is intended for use by the operator to tick each completed operation.

. . . . . . . Procedure - Setting Initial Values

25

4 Setting up a Calculation

Procedure - Setting Initial Values
1.

Cycle the engine to the zero point i.e. till the pointer
shows zero (FULL CYCLE) on the chapter disc (Fig.
4.3).

2.

Locate the release lever (Fig. 4.4).

Fig: 4.4: Location of levers.

3.

Fig. 4.3: Chapter disc at zero.

Lifting levers

Release lever

Lift the release lever till the spring catch enters the second V-groove. The arm of the camfollower lifts clear of the drive slot in the sector bar (Figs. 4.5, 4.6).

Fig. 4.5
Release lever in
normal position.

Release
lever

Fig. 4.6
Release lever
raised.

Sector bar
engaged

26

Release
lever

Sector bar
disengaged

4 Setting up a Calculation

4.

Raise one of the two lifting levers (it doesn’t matter which). The rotation in both cases is
clockwise as seen facing the Engine. The movement is small – only a few degrees. It
sometimes helps to push down on the lever first before lifting.

5.

Bayonet lock

Lock the handle in the raised position by
pulling the bayonet plunger fully out i.e.
towards the operator (Fig. 4.7). The
locking plunger must be slid out fully.
Lifting the levers to the end of their travel
can be a struggle. It is important that
they are fully lifted and locked.

6.

Repeat Steps 4 and 5 for the remaining

Fig. 4.7: Lifting lever locked raised.

lifting lever.
7.

Advance the engine to the 10–unit point as shown on the chapter disc.

8.

Engage the manual odd setting lock on the 7th difference
column (the one nearest the crank). This is done by
loosening the two knurled fixing screws and sliding the
locks into engagement so that the blades enter between
teeth of the figure wheels (Fig. 4.8). Loosen both fixing
screws first and slide the lock forward to engage the
figure wheel teeth. Ensure that lock is fully inserted.

Knurled
fixing
screws

Keep firm pressure on the lock while retightening the
fixing screws. Check by pulling on the lock that it is fully
secured.
9.

Repeat step 8 for the remaining three odd difference
columns (5th, 3rd, and 1st). The order is not critical but it
is advisable to follow each next difference in turn.

Manual
lock

10. Check that all four odd manual setting locks are

engaged.
11. Check that all four even locks are NOT engaged.

27

Fig. 4.8: Engaging
and disengaging
manual locks.

4 Setting up a Calculation

12. Advance the Engine to the 20–unit point (SET ODD).
13. Disengage the manual locks on the 7th difference column by unscrewing the knurled
screws and withdrawing the lock.
14. If automatic cycle counting is required, go to Section 4.4, Automatic Cycle Counting, p. 31
and Section 4.5, Variations, p. 43 before proceeding further. If cycle counting is not
required proceed with the next step.
15. Enter the 7th difference value. This is done by rotating each figure wheel by hand to the

initial value in the pre-calculated table. The wheels move freely. It does not matter which
direction the wheels are turned. Set the units value on the lowermost figure wheel that is
being used for the calculation. In a typical setup the units value is set on the physically
lowermost wheel on the column. However, the units wheel can be chosen higher up the
column if, for example, the lowermost wheels are being ‘rested’ and a different part of
the column is used so as distribute wear (see Section 4.4 and 4.5 for details). Once the
units wheel is set, work upwards through tens, hundreds and so on. The figure wheel
value is indicated by a cursor arrow engraved on the figure wheel supports immediately
above each figure wheel (Fig. 2.6, p. 10).
16. Re-engage the manual lock on this column. Ensure that the lock is fully inserted and held
fully engaged while the fixing screws are tightened. Check the values after the fixing
screws have been retightened.
17. Repeat steps 13 and 15 for each of the remaining three odd difference columns making
sure that the units wheel on each column is on the same horizontal line.
18. Advance the Engine to the 35-unit point.
19. Engage the four manual even setting locks by loosening the knurled fixing screws on one
of the even difference column locks and inserting the lock. Retighten the fixing screw.
Repeat the procedure for each of the three even difference columns as well as the results
column (the left-most column – the furthest from the crank). The locks should now be set
for the four evens columns (6th, 4th, 2nd difference columns) and the results column. The
order in which the locks are engaged is not material.
20. Disengage the four manual odd setting locks and secure in disengaged position.

28

4 Setting up a Calculation

21. Check that all four even setting locks are engaged and secured.
22. Check that all odd setting locks are disengaged.

23. Advance the Engine to the 45–unit point (SET EVEN) on the chapter disc pointer.
24. Disengage the manual setting lock on the 6th difference column. Retighten the fixing
screws.
25. Enter the 6th difference value from the initial value table making sure that the units wheel
on this column is on the same horizontal line as on the odd difference columns.
26. Re-engage the manual lock on the 6th difference column. Retighten the fixing screws.
27. Repeat steps 24 to 26 for the other two even difference columns.
28. Repeat steps 24 to 26 for the results column.
29. Advance the Engine to 0 (FULL CYCLE)
30. Check that the lowest carry lever on the result column is still unwarned. View this from
the rear of the Engine (Fig. 4.9). If it is warned, manually move the carry lever to the
unwarned detent.

Fig. 4.9
Lowest carry
lever in
unwarned
position.

Steel indent lever
in first notch.

31. Retract the locking plungers to release the two lifting levers.

29

4 Setting up a Calculation

32. Lower the release lever to re-engage the sectors bar. If the follower arms do not drop into
the sector bar slots, jiggle the lifting levers and lower the release lever at the same time.
33. Lower the two lifting levers in any order to re-engage the sectors. Ensure that the locking
plungers are fully retracted and held in this position by the bayonet lever at 3 o’clock (Fig.
4.7, p. 27).
34. Disengage the four manual locks on the even columns. Secure the locks in the disengaged
position making sure that the knurled fixing screws are tight.
35. Check that all eight manual locks are fully disengaged and securely fixed by tightening the
knurled fixing screws.
BE SURE TO DO THIS CHECK CAREFULLY

36. If necessary, rewind the
stereotype trays to the
start of page. This is done
by turning the wooden
rewind handle on the
pattern wheel disc (Fig.
4.10).
Turning the right hand
pattern wheel disc

Fig. 4.10: Rewind handle

anticlockwise rewinds the
trays to the top of page. This is the usual configuration. In the illustration the rewind
handle is shown on the left hand pattern wheel. It is easily swapped over by unscrewing
the knurled fixing screw in the centre and re-fixing the handle on the right hand side. Do
not attempt to rewind the trays by hand (i.e. without using the rewind handle) unless the
operation of the restraining pawls is fully understood. There is the danger of runaway and
risk of injury to an operator not familiar with the mechanism.

DO NOT REWIND THE PATTERN WHEEL DISC BY DISABLING THE PAWLS
WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING THE OPERATION OF THE CATCH AND RUNAWAY
PAWLS. SEE SECTION 5.3, STEREOTYPING, p. 47.

30

4 Setting up a Calculation

The initial values are now set and the Engine is ready to tabulate. The first result will be the
value set on the result column when setting up the initial values.

4.4 Automatic Cycle Counting (Step 14)
It is useful when tabulating to know how many cycles the Engine has executed, and the Engine
can be set up to automatically count cycles.
A number of digits (typically four) in one of the columns (typically the results column) can be
reserved to function as a cycle counter.
The procedure described below sets up a cycle counter starting at zero and incrementing by ‘1’
each cycle of the Engine. This is the typical set up for demonstration.
With this set up a ‘1’ in the 1st difference column is added to the units digit of the counter for
each complete calculating cycle. As the Engine is run, the total number of cycles accumulates
incrementally in the four-digit counter.
It may also be desirable for some tabulations to set the counter at a non-zero start value of 𝑥

and to set the 1st difference increment at ‘1’ or a number larger than ‘1’.

The counter will again give the value of 𝑥 (the ‘argument’) for each value of the result on the

result column, and automatically increment by the value set on the 1st difference column to
generate the argument.

If the counter is set up on the results column the value on the counter will be printed and
stereotyped on the same line as the corresponding result. The counter value will not be
printed if the counter is set up on any column other than the result column.
The procedure below sets up a four-digit cycle counter on the uppermost four wheels of the
results column. The counter will start at zero and increment by ‘1’ for each complete
calculating cycle.

31

4 Setting up a Calculation

Setting-up Procedure for Four-digit Cycle Counter (10,000 cycles)
At Step 14:
1. Set up the initial values for the 7th difference by completing Step 15 and 16.
2. Repeat Steps 13, 15 and 16 for each of the 5th and 3rd difference columns making sure that
the units wheel in each case is on the same horizontal line as in Step 1.
3. Repeat Steps 13 and 15 to set the initial value on the 1st difference column with the units
wheel on the same horizontal line as all the other columns but also set the fourth figure
wheel from the top ‘1’.
4. Complete Step 16 i.e. re-engage the manual lock and tighten fixing screws.
5. Disable the carry from the result
to the counter by disabling the
fourth carry lever from the top of
the results column. This isolates
the counter from the tabulation
results by stopping any carry
propagating and so prevents the
result digits overflowing into the
counter. To disable the carry lever
loosen the three fixing screws on
the reset stops pillar (Fig. 4.11)
and raise the rack to the limit
allowed by the slotted holes. By
hand, rotate the carry lever back
so that the pawl rests in the fourth
indent (the one furthest away
from the unwarned position).
Lower the reset stops column and
retighten the fixing screws. The
carry lever is now trapped behind
the reset stop and is out of action.

Fig. 4.11: Reset stops.
Reset stops
rack
32

Fixing screw in
slotted hole (3)

4 Setting up a Calculation

For typical demonstrations disabling the carry is not necessary as the number of cycles
between resetting initial values is usually too few to allow the result accumulating in the
result column to overflow.
6. Return to step 18 in the setting-up procedure.

4.5 Variations
Moving the counter to the bottom of the column
The counter can be positioned at the bottom of the columns instead of at the top. Setting the
counter at the bottom makes it easier to read and helps spread wear.
In this case the initial values for the main calculation are set up starting at the fifth figure
wheel up from the lowermost wheel on all eight columns.
1.

At Step 14, when setting up odd differences on the 7thdifference column, set the four
lowermost figure wheels to zero, and set the initial value starting at the fifth figure wheel
from the bottom i.e. set units on the fifth wheel from the bottom, the tens value on the
next wheel up (sixth from the bottom) and so on.

2.

At Step 17, for 5th and 3rd difference columns, set the four lowermost figure wheels to
zero, and set initial values starting at the fifth wheel from the bottom i.e. set units on
wheel five, tens on wheel six, and so on.

3.

For the 1st difference column, set the first (physically lowermost) to ‘1’ and wheels two,
three, and four to zero

4.

Set the initial value of the 1st difference column starting at the fifth wheel from the
bottom i.e. units on wheel five, tens on wheel six and so on.

7.

At Steps 24 through 27 (setting up even differences) set the lowest four wheels of the
even difference columns to zero and set up the initial values starting at wheel five from
the bottom.

8.

Set the lowermost four wheels of the results column to zero.

9.

Return to Step 28 to set up the results column entering the first tabular value starting
with the units value at wheel five from the bottom. Re-engage the results column manual
lock and tighten the fixing screws.

10. Disable the fourth carry lever up on the results column by advancing the lever to the
fourth (last) detent. This is done from the rear of the Engine. See Step 5, p. 32 for the
procedure.
33

4 Setting up a Calculation

11. Return to Step 29 and complete the setting up procedure.

Placed at the bottom, the cycle count will appear in the printed or stereotyped record as a
four-digit number trailing the least significant digit of the result. In this case all digits of the
counter will be printed and stereotyped.
If the top digits are reserved for the counter, the cycle count appears as the lead four digits of
the printed or stereotyped result. In this case the last (highest digit) of the counter will not be
printed or stereotyped as only 30 of the 31 digits of the result are transferred to the output
apparatus.
In the interests of spreading wear, it is recommended that the position of the counter is
swapped from time to time.

Using the Counter as the Argument
An additional elegance is to enter the start value of the independent variable (the tabulation
argument) in the section of the tabular column reserved for the cycle counter and enter the
value of the increment in the first difference column. The value of the variable will be
incremented each calculation cycle. The counter will directly record the value of the variable
and the printout will automatically have the argument and the result on the same line.

Advanced Variations
The procedures described above apply to a single polynomial tabulation with a cycle counter
set up on the results column either on the top or bottom four digits.
Initial values can be set up anywhere on the columns i.e. the calculation does not need to
occupy the lowest figure wheels, or the highest but can occupy a selected range of wheels in
horizontal bands across the columns.
Further, more than one calculation can proceed at the same time i.e. more than one
polynomial can be tabulated at once – this by splitting the columns horizontally and setting up
one calculation on say the upper section, another below, and so on.
To prevent one calculation overrunning and corrupting the one above, the carriage from the
most-significant digit of the lower calculation should be disabled by advancing the
34

4 Setting up a Calculation

corresponding carry lever to the ‘Disabled’ position i.e. the fourth (last) indent on the carry
lever as described in Step 5, p. 32.
The position of the decimal place is not set anywhere on the Engine. The machine operates in
integer mode and the decimal point can be taken as a notional horizontal line across the figure
wheel columns wherever appropriate.

35

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

5.

Operating the Output Apparatus

5.1 Overview
The output apparatus automatically:
1. Prints results in inked hard copy
2. Stereotypes results in soft material held in trays.
The printing apparatus typesets and prints inked hardcopy on a print roll and at the same time
impresses the results into soft material held in stereotyping trays. (For a general introduction
see Section 2.3, Output Apparatus, p. 12).
The output apparatus is at the left hand end of the Engine viewed from the front i.e. with the
main crank handle on the right of the viewer (Fig. 2.3, p. 8).

Inking
system
Column
pattern
wheels

Paper
roll
Travelling
platform

Column
falling
weight

Line
pattern
wheels

Rewind
handle

Line
falling
weight
Rewind
clutch

Chapter
disc

End of page
trip cradle

Auxiliary
crank
Fig. 5.1: Output apparatus for printing and stereotyping.

36

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

There is no buffering or storage of results. Each result is printed and stereotyped during the
calculating cycle that generates it.

5.2 Printing
The inked hard copy is for checking purposes. The main outputs are the stereotype moulds
produced in the trays. These are intended for making printing plates for the production of
printed mathematical tables using conventional printing presses.
The lower thirty-digits of the thirty-one digit result are automatically transferred from the last
column of the calculating section to the printer and at the same time to punch wheels for
stereotyping.
The format of the inked hardcopy from the printer is not programmable. It prints one result
per line with fixed line height and font size. The thirty printed digits for each result fill the
width of the print roll and the format is fixed unalterably (see Section 2, Fig. 2.8, p. 13).

. . . . . Inking

37

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Inking
The inking mechanism is located immediately above the paper roll system (Fig. 5.2). The
mechanism consists of an ink bath and a system of rollers that supply ink to the inking roller.
Once each cycle the inking roller sweeps in a downward arc down into contact with the type
wheels to deposit ink on the type face (Fig. 5.2). While in contact with the type wheels the
inking bar has a small wiping motion.

Ink
bath
Inkpot
roller
Spreader
roller
Transfer
roller

Arc of
travel

Inking
roller
Type
wheels
Paper
rollerbar

Fig. 5.2: Inking and paper systems.

Paper system

To ensure an even distribution of ink the inking mechanism has a spreader roller that oscillates
laterally a small distance each cycle, and two spreader plates. The spreader plates have
precision straight edges that ensure an even spread of ink and prevent ink accumulating on the
rollers.
38

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

The inking roller retracts rapidly once it has inked the type wheels. Immediately it is out of the
way the paper roller-bar and paper feed barrel sweep in a long arc to press the roller bar
against the type wheels and take an inked impression on the paper roll.
The ink bath is protected from dust and debris
by a flip-up brass lid. Flipping this up exposes
the ink bath formed by the scraper plate,
inkpot roller, and side cheeks of the inking
assembly (Fig. 5.3).
Water-based non-toxic black printing ink is
recommended.
Fig. 5.3: Inking
system.

Ink Viscosity

Flip-up ink
bath cover

Counterbalance
weight

The ink is viscous to begin with. Dilution by trial
and error is necessary to establish the right
balance of wetting and flow characteristics.
If the ink is too thick it clogs the type wheels.
The rollers tend to stick together and there is a
risk of the inking roller being pulled out of the
mounting slots (a brass retaining wire seeks to
prevent this). If the ink is too dilute, there is a
tendency to runs and smudges.

Fig. 5.4: Inking roller
mounting.

Inking
roller
Retaining
Mounting
wire
slot

Cleaning
The recommended ink is water-based and will corrode the mechanism if left in contact.

WATER BASED INK SHOULD NOT BE LEFT IN THE INK BATH OR ON THE ROLLERS. THE
INKING MECHANISM SHOULD BE DISMANTLED AND EACH PART WASHED AND DRIED
AFTER EACH USE.

39

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Immediately after use the ink bath assembly including all rollers should be dismantled and
each part that has come into contact with ink washed thoroughly.
Clean the print wheel type face with warm water and dry with a paper towel. When most of
the ink has been removed use warm water and cotton buds to clean the type face especially
the relieved centres of the ‘0’s. Re-dry with a paper towel. Be careful not to slop water that
might penetrate between the print wheels or dribble down onto the horizontal racks below.
Dismantling and reassembly takes about two hours.

Priming the Inking System
The inking system should be primed to check viscosity and ensure even distribution of ink
before a calculation is run.
There are three priming methods. The easiest is listed first and the list is in order of increasing
difficulty.
1.

Use the ink priming knob.

2.

Run the Engine for several cycles from the main crank.

3.

Uncouple the output apparatus from the Engine and run separately using the auxiliary
crank.

The easiest way to prime the inking
system is to turn the priming knob (Fig.
5.5). This exercises all the rollers and
encourages even ink distribution. The
ratchet pawl does not need to be lifted:
it is sprung and will lift to clear the
ratchet teeth as the knob is turned.
Using the priming knob does not disturb
the calculation and does not require
uncoupling the output apparatus from

Fig. 5.5 Inking.

the Engine.

40

Priming knob

Ink bath

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

The inking supply can also be primed by running the Engine for several cycles by cranking the
main handle. In this case the calculation may need to be reset when tabulation is resumed.
Finally, the inking system can also be primed by uncoupling the output apparatus from the
Engine and running the output apparatus separately using the auxiliary crank (Fig. 5.6).
The uncoupling clutch is located in line with the main drive shaft running the length of the
Engine on the underside between the cam stack to the output apparatus (Fig. 5.6).

Fig. 5.6

Uncoupling clutch

Auxiliary crank

The clutch is coupled and uncoupled by operating a set of levers in a fixed sequence by hand.
When the drive is uncoupled the output apparatus can be driven independently of the
calculating section by using the auxiliary crank located at the printing end of the Engine. For
the procedure to uncouple the output apparatus from the main drive see Section 5.4,
Uncoupling the Drive, p. 64.
The clutch uncouples the drive only: the results column remains coupled to the output
apparatus and 30-digit data transfer from the calculating section to the output apparatus
continues. There is no facility for uncoupling the results column from the output apparatus.
The clutch can only be engaged and disengaged at fixed points in the cycle. So if ink runs out or
the inking system needs priming during a run of calculations advancing the cycle to the fixed
point at which the clutch can be uncoupled may produce some spoiled printouts and the
calculation may need resetting before resuming tabulation.

41

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Replacing the Print Roll
Inked copy is printed on paper from a paper roll as a checking record. The paper supply for the
production of inked hardcopy is controlled by the paper feed mechanism (Fig. 5.7).

Fig 5.7: Paper feed.

Inking
roller-bar

Feed
barrel

Winding
handle

Take-up
spool

The paper automatically advances the height of one line each Engine cycle to take a new
impression on each newly-presented line of paper. The feed barrel holds the paper stock.
The end of the paper is trapped on the feed drum and cannot run free when the paper runs out.
Paper stock should therefore be renewed before it runs out to prevent the paper pulling the
feed drum assembly and disrupting operation.
The paper path is shown in Fig. 5.8. Paper is threaded from the feed barrel under and around
the printing roller-bar above, and onto the take-up spool on the left of the drawing. The rollerbar has a fixed flat rubber bar that presses against the typeface of the printing wheels.
The roller-bar and feed barrel swing through a large arc each cycle to press the paper against
the inked typeface of the print wheels. Part of the trajectory is shown anticlockwise in Fig. 5.8
(dotted line at top right of picture).

42

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Fig. 5.8: Paper feed.

Take-up spool

Paper
path

Feed
barrel

Roller-bar

Paper stock should be renewed before it fully runs out. The main operations to renew the paper
are: trapping one end of the paper stock on the feed barrel, freeing the feed barrel to turn so
that the paper can be loaded onto it, threading it through the paper path and fixing the far end
to the take-up spool.

Procedure
1. Rotate the feed barrel by turning the handle
until the tenon strip that traps the paper
end is exposed with the two fixing screws
accessible (Fig. 5.9).
2. Loosen the two screws using an Allen key.
3. Fold over about a half-inch of paper making
a sharp fold (Fig. 5.10).

43

Fig. 5.9: Paper mechanism.

Tenon strip
(fixing screws
obscured)

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Fig. 5.10

4. Place the paper roll in the detachable
magazine (or any container to stop it rolling
away) and feed the folded paper end under
the print roller-bar (Fig. 5. 11).
5. Insert the folded paper end under the
tenon strip and half tighten the screws with
the Allen key (Fig. 5.12).
6. Align the paper by wrapping it a short
length over the feed drum and tighten the
two Allen screws. This traps the paper end
(Fig. 5.13).

Fig. 5.11

Fig. 5.12

44

5 Operating the Output Apparatus
7. To free the feed barrel to turn pull the
cam lever (on the left of the take-up
spool) forward to disengage the backstop
pawl. This is the upper pawl on the
ratchet gear on the take-up spool axis
(Fig. 5.14).
8. Pull back the feed pawl – the lower pawl
operating on the ratchet gear.
9. Wind the paper from the roll of paper
stock onto the feed barrel by turning the

Fig. 5.13

handle on the right aligning the paper as
it wraps and maintaining light even
pressure. Wind on about 32 turns. (Fig.
5.15). This is sufficient for about 500
results.
10. Rotate the take-up spool to expose the
tenon strip and fixing screws. Partly
loosen the two fixing screws.
11. Re-engage the two pawls: push back cam
to engage the backstop pawl, and engage

Fig. 5.14

the feed pawl by pushing it back into
engagement.
12. Free up a length of paper, wrap it round
the roller-bar. Pull it to the take-up spool
and lay it over the tenon strip. Mark the
length of paper at the near side of the
tenon strip (Fig. 5.16).
13. Fold on the mark and cut at the fold.
14. Fold back about a half inch of paper
15. Rotate the take-up spool towards you to
bias it against the internal clock spring.

Fig. 5.15

Rotate till it stops. Holding the spool in
the biased position insert the folded
paper end under the tenon. Adjust the
amount folded back in Step 14 so that
the paper has no slack with the take up
spool fully biased against the clock spring.
16. Secure the tenon strip by tightening the
two fixing screws with an Allen key.

Fig. 5.16

45

Backstop pawl
release cam

Feed pawl

5 Operating the Output Apparatus
17. Paper loading complete (Fig. 5.17).

Fig. 5.17

Adjusting the Paper Roller-bar
The paper roller bar has a stiff flat rubbery
bearing strip which presses the paper flat
against the type wheels to take the
impression. The angle of the bar may need
adjustment to ensure that the bearing strip
presses flat in the plane of the face of the
type wheels to ensure an even impression.
The angle of the roller-bar can be adjusted

Fig. 5.18: Roller-bar adjusting spanners.

using two special flat spanners (Fig. 5.18). For
details see of fine adjustment see Section 6.4, Special Tools, p. 101.

46

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

5.3 Stereotyping
The stereotyping apparatus is programmable and several layout options are available.
Different layouts are chosen by selecting one of several pattern wheels which control the
format of stereotyped results.
A set of pattern wheels with fixed but different formatting combinations are preloaded or
‘factory fitted’. One set of pattern wheels controls line-to-line format. A second set of pattern
wheels controls column-to-column format (Fig. 5.1, p. 36).
The pattern wheels are readily accessible from the front of the output apparatus and different
pattern wheels can be loaded for other layouts.
Line formatting features that can be varied are line height, number of lines in a column, and
leaving blank lines between groups of lines – this for ease of reading.
Column formatting features that can be varied include the number of columns on a page,
margin width between columns, and page borders.
The formatting features are not independently variable but come in fixed combinations
determined by the pattern wheels. New combinations will require new pattern wheels.
The two stereotyping trays are mounted on travelling platforms and are automatically
positioned under the punch wheels in the stereotyping apparatus and move each cycle to
receive each new result.
The movement of the trays is driven by falling weights. The pitch and distribution of teeth on
the pattern wheels controls the platform motion.
A pair of pawls acts as an escapement (Figs 5.21, 5.22, p. 49). Each cycle the pawls release the
pattern wheel to advance one tooth only, driven by the falling weights.
Stereotyping can proceed down the page (line-to-line) with automatic fly back to the top of a
new column, or across the page (column-to-column) and automatically line wrap at the end of
a line (Figs 5.19, 5.20, p. 48). This option is set separately on an oscillating bar.

47

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

For line-to-line motion (down the page) the trays move from right to left as viewed facing the
pattern wheels i.e. looking a the Engine end on from the output apparatus end. For column-tocolumn motion the travelling platform moves towards the viewer as seen facing the pattern
wheels.

Fig. 5.19: Line-line format
with automatic column flyback (simulation).

Fig. 5.20: Column-column
format with automatic line
wrap (simulation).

If the trays are not at the start position at the beginning of a calculation run they are rewound
by hand using a rewind handle (Fig. 5.1, p. 36). This repositions the trays at the start of page
and rewinds the weights to their raised position.
For line-to-line formatting the trays and falling weights are rewound automatically and the
column-to-column travelling platform is rewound by hand. If only one column is used then no
manual rewind of the column motion is necessary.
For column-to-column formatting, the column travelling platform and falling weights are
rewound automatically and the line trays are rewound by hand.
Results are stereotyped in two fonts simultaneously in separate trays. The smaller font has the
line height automatically reduced.

48

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Setting Formatting Options

Line catch pawl
fixing screw

Formatting options are set by
selecting particular pattern
wheels from the sets already
mounted.

Line catch pawl
Pattern wheels

A pattern wheel is selected by
sliding two pawls (a catch pawl
and a runaway pawl) to engage

Runaway
pawl

with a chosen pattern wheel.

Runaway pawl
fixing screw

Fig. 5.21: Line pattern wheel pawls.

The lower pawls in each cluster

Blank pattern
wheel

Column catch pawl
Fixing screw

are runaway pawls. The upper
pawl is the line catch pawl in
the case of the line pattern
wheels, and the column catch
in the case of the column

Column catch pawl
Column pattern
wheels

pattern wheels.
Runaway pawl
Runaway pawl
fixing screw

Fig. 5.22: Column pattern wheel pawls.

49

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

DO NOT CHANGE PAWL SELECTION WITHOUT FIRST READING THE
PROCEDURE BELOW

This procedure should only be undertaken with care and with an understanding of the danger of
uncontrolled runaway when the pawls are disabled.

Explanation: Risk of Runaway
The trays, travelling platform, and falling weights are heavy.
Two pawls in an escapement arrangement ensure that the pattern wheels advance only one
tooth at a time during each calculating cycle. This ensures that the weights are lowered and
that the platform advances in a controlled way one fixed increment at a time.
With both pawls disengaged the pattern wheel assembly can turn freely driven by the falling
weights.
This can be dangerous.
Without the restraining action of the pawls there is danger of uncontrolled runaway. The
weights fall freely driving the travelling platforms. The trays accelerate, impact the end stops,
and the weights crash down on the wooden plinth. There is also the danger that the small and
large trays, which have separate line-to-line drives, collide and damage the drive train.
Runaway by the column weights is less dangerous: column-to-column runaway is cushioned by
a dashpot. But there is still the risk of damage to the plinth by the falling weights.
Care should be taken to avoid any form of runaway
In the procedure described one pawl at a time is disengaged so that the remaining pawl
restrains the pattern wheel.
An additional precaution against runaway is provided by the operator restraining the pattern
wheel by hand as the pawl is released. This provides protection against inadvertently
disengaging both pawls at the same time.

50

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

The rewind handle should be used to restrain the pattern wheels during the procedure. With
experience the pattern wheels can be restrained or the platform rewound by gripping the
pattern wheel without using the rewind handle. But this should not be attempted until the
procedures and the dangers are well understood.
Preventing runaway by hand is not difficult if the load is always kept under control and the
movements are expected. The danger is that both pawls are released inadvertently or without
full expectation of the result. Once runaway starts the platform gains momentum and it is
difficult and dangerous to arrest by hand.
Care should be exercised to follow the procedure described exactly and to understand the
implications of disengaging each of the pawls.

Formatting Options: Pattern Wheel Selection
The line pattern wheels are the right hand cluster (Fig. 5.1, p. 36). The column pattern wheels
are the left hand cluster. Each cluster has four pattern wheels.
Each pattern wheel is stamped on the edge with a unique identifying letter. The line pattern
wheels are A, B, C, and D. The column pattern wheels are E, F, G and H.
Only one line pattern wheel and one column pattern wheel is active at any time.
Each line pattern wheel provides a fixed combination of top and bottom margins, number of
lines per page and additional gaps between fixed groups of results. Pattern wheels A, B and C
provide 30, 50 and 60 lines per page respectively and tooth spacing is such that wider gaps are
left every five lines. Wheel D (the outermost one) is blank and can be machined for a new
combination of top and bottom margins, number of lines, line spacing, and additional gaps at
given intervals.
The column pattern wheels control left and right margins, number of columns, and margins
between columns. The apparatus can stereotype in one, two or three columns.
The full set of line pattern wheel combinations, and the layouts that result are shown in
Appendix 10.4, Stereotyping Layout Options, p. 145.

51

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Changing Line Format
Line-to-line formats are selected by moving the two pawls to operate on one of four pattern
wheels in the right hand cluster of pattern wheels (Fig. 5.1, p. 36).
Procedure
1.

Fix the wooden rewind handle to the line pattern wheel mounting disc. This is simply
done – fixing is with a central screw with knurled knob.

2.

Turn the output apparatus using the main crank to zero units (FULL CYCLE) on the main
chapter disc (this corresponds to LOCKED PRINTER on the auxiliary chapter disc). This
disengages the runaway pawl.

3.

Unscrew the runaway pawl fixing screw only sufficiently to slide on the flat (Fig. 5.21, p.
49).

4.

Slide the pawl to the new pattern wheel. If sliding the pawl is obstructed by a tooth on the
new wheel then slightly back off the pattern wheels using the wooden handle and release
when the pawl is in the new position. The pawl can be given extra clearance by pushing
the lower pawl lever clockwise against the spring.

5.

Retighten the fixing screw making sure that it bears square on the flat.

6.

Advance to 43 units to engage the runaway pawl. If the pawl engagement is obstructed by
a tooth, back off the pattern wheels using the wooden handle until the pawl engages.
WARNING: DO NOT OMIT STEP 6
The lower pawl must be engaged to prevent the weights plunging downwards
uncontrolled (runaway) when the line catch is released in Step 7.

7.

With the runaway pawl engaged, disengage the line catch by pushing the line catch lever
anti-clockwise against the spring.

8.

Partially unscrew the line catch fixing screw only sufficiently to slide on the flat.

9.

Slide the line catch pawl to the new pattern wheel. If sliding the pawl is obstructed by a
tooth then slightly back off the pattern wheels using the wooden handle and release
when the pawl is in the new position.

10. Retighten the fixing screw making sure that it bears square on the flat.
11. Release the line catch lever to engage the pawl.

52

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Note
With experience the procedure can be carried out without the wooden handle and without
Step 6. Instead of disengaging the runaway pawl by advancing the cycle (Step 2), the pawl can
be disengaged by manually operating the runaway pawl lever which is behind the oscillating
bar (Figs 5.24, 5.25). It does not matter too much where in the cycle the pattern wheel
selection is changed provided both pawls are engaged at the start of the procedure.
Disengaging the runaway pawl by hand leaves only one hand to unscrew and slide the pawl,
and you are a hand short if the pattern wheels need to be backed off to allow the pawl to slide
behind a tooth on the new pattern wheel. Some deftness is needed.
The pattern wheels can be backed off without the wooden handle
by gripping the spokes (Fig. 5.23). The weights are heavy and this
should only be attempted with experience and an understanding of
the stepwise procedure.
When first following the procedure extra safety can be provided by

Fig. 5.23

keeping a hand on the wooden handle and backing it off against
the load of the drop weights so the load is taken by hand even with the pawls engaged.
Preventing runaway in this way offers direct reassurance of control and does not rely on one
or another of the pawls on its own.

Changing Column Format
The same procedure can be used to change the column pattern wheels. In step 2 set the
chapter disc to zero units (LOCK PRINTER) and to 43 units for step 6 as for changing line
format.
It does not matter whether line-to-line format changes are made before or after column-tocolumn changes in situations when both are being altered.

53

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Advancing to End-of-Page: Skipping Printing Cycles
It is often desirable or necessary to advance the trays to the end of page without having to
crank through a full complement of lines. This procedure is especially useful when testing or
exercising the end-of-column or end-of-page fly-back. It is also useful for maintenance,
lubrication, commissioning or debugging the stereotype apparatus.
The following procedure describes how to advance the travelling platform by skipping printing
cycles.
Both pawls are disengaged to disable the escapement action, and the platform, driven by the
falling weights, is allowed to move against the controlled manual restraint of the operator.

DO NOT UNDERTAKE THIS PROCEDURE WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING HOW THE PAWLS
PREVENT UNCONTROLLED RUNAWAY

Procedure
1.

Grip the pattern wheel disc with left hand as shown in Fig. 5.24 with thumb on the upper
rim and fingers hooked around one of the spokes.

2.

Prepare to take the load of the pattern wheels which are trying to turn clockwise driven
by the falling weights. Brace your hand and arm to hold the wheel against turning.

3.

With the right hand, prise the two pawl levers apart (Fig. 5.24). This disengages both the
pawls and allows the pattern wheels to turn freely driven by the falling weights. (The
runaway pawl release lever is tucked behind the lower horizontal oscillating bar)

Line catch pawl
lever

Line runaway
pawl lever

Fig. 5.24: Manual Pawl Release.
54

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

4.

With the left hand controlling the pattern wheel allow it to turn clockwise. This advances
the trays to the left i.e. towards the bottom of the page.

5.

When the wheel has gone as far as can be guided in a controlled way with the left hand,
release one or both of the pawls levers and make sure the pawl engages to halt the
wheel.

6.

With the wheel secured by one or both of the pawls, reposition the left hand to allow
more travel.

7.

Repeat the procedure until a few teeth before the end-of-column. The end-of-column
position is indicated on the rim of the line pattern-wheel where the teeth stop and the
rim is smooth.

8.

Release both pawls levers if not yet released and ensure they engage before releasing the
pattern wheel.

The procedure is more easily carried out with the wooden rewind handle fitted but can be
carried out as described without the inconvenience of swapping the rewind handle over.
The same procedure can be used to position the travelling platform anywhere in a column in
line-to-line mode on the page, halting the platform where needed and finishing the procedure
at Step 6.
Similarly, the same procedure can be used to position and halt the travelling platform across
the page i.e. position the travelling platform on any column.
In column mode the recommended hand position for releasing the two pawls is shown in Fig.
5.25.

Column runaway
pawl lever
Column catch
pawl lever

Fig. 5.25: Manual pawl release (Column).

55

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

In column mode it is recommended that the wooden rewind handle is used. The space
between teeth on the column pattern wheels is much greater than on the line pattern wheels
and there is the danger of runaway between the teeth if the pattern wheel is restrained by
gripping the wheel without the rewind handle.

Resetting after End of Page
The end-of-page condition triggers automatic rewind when the top oscillating bar operates the
rewind clutch lever (Fig. 5.29, p. 58).
At the same time a trip weight drops to lower a cradle (Fig. 5.26) which pivots down under the
weight to operate the trip lever. The trip lever pulls the catgut line which runs via pulleys to
the top of the cam stack and disengages the main crank drive by operating a scoop clutch (Fig.
5.27).
The drop weight falls at 43 units in the cycle, the scoop clutch disengages the main drive at 49
units and the main crank handle runs free.

Fig. 5.26: End-of-page trip.

Trip
Drop
Trip
weight cradle lever

56

Counterweight

Gut trip
cord

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

To resume tabulation after
end-of-page tripping the drop
weight and the cradle lever
needs to be reset, and the

Cam stack
bevel gear
Main Drive

scoop clutch needs to be reengaged.

Clutch
Scoop lever
Gut cord from
trip cradle
Fig. 5.27: End-of-page drive disengagement.

Procedure - End-of-Page Reset
1.

Locate the end-of-page reset lever – between
the two pattern wheel sets (Fig. 5.28).

2.

During normal operation the reset lever is in
the 2 o’clock position. After end-of-page has
been triggered and the weight has dropped,
the reset lever is in the three o’clock position
resting against the end stop pin. Rotate the
reset lever from three o’clock to about one
Fig. 5.28: Drop weight reset lever.

o’clock. This raises the drop weight.
3.

Release the lever slowly lowering it clockwise
until it rests at about two o’clock.

4.

Raise the cradle trip lever (Fig. 5.26) by hand and locate the drop weight in the trough.

5.

Reset the scoop clutch on top of the cam stack to re-engage the main crank drive (Fig. 5.27).

57

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

Converting Format from Line-to-Line to Column-to-Column
Converting from line-to-line to column-to-column and vice versa involves flipping over the
upper of the two oscillating bars, altering the position of an actuator pin, changing over the
rewind drive and, if necessary, adjusting the amount of rewind.

Fig. 5.29: Oscillating bars.

Keeper pin

Lower oscillating bar

Rewind clutch lever

Line activating pin
Upper oscillating bar

Before the conversion is carried out both line and column falling weights need to be lowered
till there is no tension in the suspension cables (Fig. 5.1, p. 36). Lowering each weight involves
disabling both the pawls. Unless managed carefully and safely this procedure runs the risk of
damage and injury from uncontrolled runaway.
For explanation of runaway see Section 5.3 (Explanation: Risk of Runaway), p. 50.

DO NOT UNDERTAKE THIS PROCEDURE WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING HOW THE
PAWLS PREVENT UNCONTROLLED RUNAWAY

Procedure
1.

Place a protective sheet or pad on the plinth under the falling weight.

2.

Lower the line falling weight following the procedure detailed in Section 5.3, Advancing to
End-of-Page: Skipping Printing Cycles, p. 54. Control the lowering of the weight as
described until the weight rests on the plinth and there is no tension in the cable.

3.

Repeat Steps 1 and 2 for the column falling weight.

4.

Unscrew upper pawl activating pin at the line-to-line end of upper oscillating bar (Fig.
5.30).
DO NOT OMMIT STEPS 1, 2 AND 3. THE PROCEDURE THAT FOLLOWS CAN BE
HAZARDOUS IF THE WEIGHTS ARE NOT FULLY LOWERED

58

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Remove the keeper pin to free the upper oscillating bar (Fig. 5.29).
Invert the upper oscillating bar (flip it over keeping the ‘arrow’ facing left).
Replace the keeper pin.
Add thickening sleeve to the column pawl activating pin (Fig. 5.31).
Transfer the pin to the column end of upper oscillating bar by screwing it in to the threaded
hole (Fig. 5.31).

Fig. 5.30: Line activating pin.

Fig. 5.31: Column activating pin.

10. Release the latch on the changeover shaft (Fig.
5.32).
11. Push in the freed shaft to engage the idler wheel.
If teeth foul, back off the column-column pattern
wheel assembly with the wooden handle to align
teeth with gaps.
12. Re-engage latch to fix shaft in new position.
Fig: 5.32: Changeover latch.

Adjusting Rewind
The amount the travelling platform rewinds automatically at the end of page is set by the
angular position of a pair of dogs on the rewind clutch (Figs 5.33, 5.34).

59

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

The position of the dogs on the rewind gear may need altering to ensure that the amount of
rewind is correct – enough to raise the column weights for the format configuration chosen
but not too much as an overrun causes an uncontrolled fall back when the rewind clutch
releases.
The location of the rewind clutch is shown in Fig. 5.33. The pair of dogs and drive gear is shown
in Fig. 5.34 before installation. The adjustment is made without removing the drive gear and
dogs.

Fig. 5.33: Rewind clutch.

Fig. 5.34: Clutch dogs and
drive gear.
Fixing holes
(18-off)

Dogs

Studs
(ring screws)

The angular position of the dogs is determined by two studs or ‘ring screws’ that fix it to the
drive gear hub in one of nine positions. The position of the dogs to provide the correct amount
of rewind is found by trial and error by unscrewing the studs to free the dog-plate, rotating the

60

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

dogs to the new position, and then refixing with the ring screws. The studs fix through the back
of the hub into two of eighteen fixing holes.

Adjusting Dashpot Damping
In normal operation the travelling platform can traverse nearly six inches in moving from one
column to the next and substantially more in the event of runaway. The transverse column
motion is cushioned by a dashpot that acts as a speed governor to reduce linear speed and
also to relieve the impact on the pawls and, in the event of runaway, on the frame.
The dashpot is located underneath the
travelling platform (Figs 5.35, 5.36).
The dashpot is an oil-filled cylinder that
damps motion by forcing oil through a series
of internal holes.
The damping is one-directional i.e. the return
stroke is not damped.
Fig. 5.35: Location of dashpot.

Dashpot

The amount of damping depends on the
viscosity of the oil, an internal adjustment
using spacing washers, and the number of
falling weights in the set driving the column-tocolumn motion of the travelling platform.
If the platform builds up too much speed in

Fig. 5.36 Dashpot viewed from underside.

traversing from one column to the next the
following three actions should be taken. They are listed in order of increasing difficulty. Go on to
the next action only if the prior one is not effective.

To Reduce Platform Speed
1. 5educe the number of weights in the set of column-column falling weights.
2. 7op up the oil level in the dashpot cylinder.
3. $djust internal packing washers to alter oil flow.

61

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

1. Falling Weights
The simplest effective way of adjusting the travel speed of the platform is to change the
number of tiers on the set of falling weights. There must be enough weight to overcome
initial friction and drive the platform smoothly once under way. If the platform is travelling too
fast then reducing the number or weights is usually sufficient to achieve this.

2. Topping up Oil Level
From time to time in may be necessary to top up the level of oil in the dashpot cylinder to
replace loss through leakage. The dashpot needs to be removed to do this. The oil needs to
be thin enough to flow and thick enough to provide damping action. For oil specification see
Section 6.2 and Section 9, Specification.

Procedure
1. Remove the large mounting nut
on the Engine-side of the
dashpot and slide the dashpot
out of the slide-fixing on the
plunger side (nearest the
operator) (Fig. 5.37).
2. Invert the dashpot so that the
plunger is below and the
cylinder above.
3. Push the plunger upwards fully
into the cylinder.
4. Release the plunger and allow

Fig. 5.37: Dashpot.

to fall pulling on it gently.

Dashpot
cylinder

Plunger

Slide
fixing

5. The first part of the downward travel is relatively free. At the point at which resistance
increases check that the plunger is extended 3¼ inches.
6. Add or remove oil through the filling hole to achieve this.

62

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

3. Internal Adjustment
As a last resort alter the position of internal packing washers to alter the oil aperture.
The dashpot needs to be fully dismantled to do this.
The size of the annular aperture is adjusted by exchanging packing washers from RQHside of the
conical plunger to the far end of the return spring.

63

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

5.4 Uncoupling the Drive
Overview
There are circumstances in which it may be desirable to run the calculating section
independently of the output apparatus and vice versa.
Priming the inking system, fault-diagnosis, adjustment and repair, are situations in which the
output apparatus may need to be cycled without disturbing the calculating section. Resetting
initial values in the middle of a page also requires the calculating section to be run without
advancing printing and stereotyping.
A clutch uncouples the main drive to the
output apparatus and allows the two
sections of the Engine to be run
independently (Fig. 5.38).
The uncoupling clutch is located in line
with the main drive shaft running the
length of the Engine on the underside
from the cam stack to the output
apparatus (Fig. 5.6, p. 41).
The clutch is engaged and disengaged by
operating two hand levers in a strict
sequence at specific points in the cycle.
Interlocks in the clutch mechanism
prevent the output apparatus and the
Fig. 5.38: Uncoupling clutch. View from rear.
Output apparatus is on the right.

calculating section being run
independently at the same time. Freeing

one to operate locks the other: when the output apparatus is being run, the calculating section
is locked at 35 units on the main chapter disc; when the calculating section is being run
uncoupled from the output apparatus, the output apparatus is locked at zero.
The clutch interlock mechanism ensures that re-coupling the two sections for normal use can
only occur at fixed points in the cycle and when the two sections are correctly phased.
When uncoupled from the calculating apparatus the output apparatus is driven using the
auxiliary crank (Fig. 5.1, p. 36). This is located at the opposite end of the Engine to the main

64

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

crank. The auxiliary crank allows the printer and stereotyping apparatus to be operated at
normal speed, in slow motion or incrementally, with the operator close to the apparatus. Having
a crank local to the apparatus facilitates adjustment, fault finding and repair.
The Engine should not be driven from the auxiliary crank when the two sections of the Engine
are coupled together as they are in normal operation.
The clutch cannot be used as a general debugging aid to isolate the two sections of the Engine
at an arbitrary point in the timing cycle. Since the two sections of the Engine can be uncoupled only
at two specific points, in the event of a jam the clutch cannot be used to isolate the two sections from
each other for fault-finding unless the fault happens to occur at 0 or 35 units.
In the event, for example, that the printer jams, this should be cleared so that the Engine can be
cycled to one of the uncoupling points. The clutch should be released using the procedures
below and the fault can be further investigated running the printer independently of the
calculating section.

Engaging and Disengaging the Clutch
The clutch is operated using two levers, the

Clutch lever

clutch lever which engages and disengages

Locking lever

the clutch, and the locking lever which
immobilises one or another of the two lengths
of shaft. The clutch lever is accessed from the
front of the Engine; the locking lever from the
rear (Figs. 5.39, 5.40).

Note – Use an Assistant
The clutch can couple or uncouple only at
exact points in the cycle (0 and 35). The clutch
and locking levers cannot be operated unless
the alignment is exact i.e. under- or overrunning these stop points prevents

Fig. 5.39: Clutch lever
(view from front of
Engine).

disengaging or re-engaging the clutch.
It is difficult to cycle the Engine and stop at an
exact point using only the chapter wheels as

65

Fig. 5.40: Locking
lever (view from rear
of Engine).

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

guides. Also, if the clutch is under load as, for example, when attempting to stop at 35 to
disengage, it can be hard to operate the clutch lever to slide out the dogs.
The coupling and uncoupling procedures are easier to carry out with two operators, one at the
clutch, the other one of the crank handles. The operator at the crank should stop slightly short
of the required stopping point and then nudge on using the technique described in Section 3.2,
Edging Towards a Timing Point, p. 17.
While the operator at the crank edges towards the target timing point, the operator at the
clutch jiggles either the locking or clutch lever into or out of engagement as the incremental
rotation of the shaft progresses.
This edging technique using two operators is recommended for all procedures to engage or
disengage the uncoupling clutch.

To run the Output Apparatus independently (calculating section locked):
Starting State:

Output apparatus coupled to calculating section.

Lever Positions:

Locking lever (rear) faces left as seen from rear of Engine.
Clutch lever faces right as seen from front of Engine.

Procedure
1.

Turn the main Engine crank to indicate 35 units on the main chapter disc.

2.

From the front of the Engine free the clutch lever by unscrewing and retracting the knurled
thumbscrew.

3.

Turn the front lever anticlockwise to disengage the clutch (it now faces left).

4.

Replace the thumbscrew to secure the lever.

5.

Leave the rear lever unchanged i.e. facing left as seen from rear.

The main Engine is now locked at 35 units and the output apparatus can be operated
independently from the auxiliary crank.

66

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

To Re-couple after running Output Apparatus independently

Starting State:

Engine locked at 35 units. Output apparatus free to run. Clutch disengaged.

Lever Positions:

Locking lever (rear) facing left as seen from rear of Engine.
Clutch lever (front) facing left as seen from front of Engine.

Procedure
1.

Turn the output apparatus to 35 units on the printer chapter disc.

2.

Unscrew and retract the thumbscrew from the clutch lever (front) to free the clutch lever.

3.

Turn the clutch lever (front) clockwise (so that it faces right as seen from the front of the
Engine).

4.

Replace the thumbscrew to secure the clutch lever.

The calculating and output apparatus are now coupled together for normal operation.

To run the Engine independently (Output Apparatus locked)
Starting State:

Engine and output apparatus coupled.

Lever Positions:

Locking lever (rear) faces left as seen from rear of Engine.
Clutch lever (front) faces right as seen from front of Engine.

Procedure
1. Turn the main Engine crank to zero (FULL CYCLE) on the main chapter disc.
2. Unscrew and retract the knurled thumbscrew to free the locking lever (rear).
3. Turn the locking lever clockwise to lock the output apparatus.
4. Replace the thumbscrew to secure the locking lever.
5. Free the clutch lever (front) by unscrewing and retracting the knurled thumbscrew.
6. Turn the front lever anticlockwise to disengage the clutch (it now faces left).
7. Replace the thumbscrew to secure the lever.
The calculating section is now free to run and the output apparatus is locked at zero.

67

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

To Re-couple the Output Apparatus after Running the Engine Independently
Starting State:

Output Apparatus locked at 0. Engine free to operate. Clutch disengaged.

Lever Positions:

Locking lever (rear) right.
Clutch lever (front) left.

Procedure
1.

Turn the main Engine crank to 35 units on the main chapter disk.

2.

Free the locking lever by unscrewing and retracting the knurled thumbscrew.

3.

Turn the locking lever (rear) anti-clockwise.

4.

Replace the thumbscrew to secure the locking lever.

5.

Rotate the auxiliary crank to read 35 units on the printer chapter disc.

6.

Free the clutch lever by unscrewing and retracting the knurled thumbscrew.

7.

Turn the clutch lever clockwise to engage the clutch.

8.

Replace the thumbscrew to secure the clutch lever.

The calculating section and output apparatus are now coupled with both at 35 units.

Summary
The following table summarises the lever positions, cycle points, and functional status of the
Engine and output apparatus when run separately and together.
In the table ‘right’ and ‘left’ are as seen facing the clutch lever and locking lever as though
operating them. So moving the locking lever (rear of Engine) anti-clockwise moves it from facing
right to facing left.

. . . . . . Status Table

68

5 Operating the Output Apparatus

STATUS TABLE

Units

Clutch
Lever

(Front)

Locking
Lever

Unit Locked

Run Printer Only

35

Left

Left

Engine

Run Engine Only

0

Left

Right

Printer

Run Both

35

Right

Left

Neither

Run None
(Both Locked)

0

Right

Right

Both

Function

Cycle

(Rear)

THE ENGINE SHOULD NOT BE DRIVEN FROM THE AUXILIARY CRANK WHEN THE
TWO SECTIONS OF THE ENGINE ARE COUPLED TOGETHER

69

6 Maintenance and Repair

6.

Maintenance and Repair
6.1 Replacing Parts on an Axis
The parts most commonly damaged are the smaller repeated parts in the calculating section.
Particularly vulnerable are the bronze carry levers.
Figure wheels, sector wheels, carry levers, and carry arms can be replaced without removing
their axes from the frame.
Removing the top bearing plates gives access from above and the parts can be removed one at
a time by lifting them out in turn through the top frame (Fig. 6.1).
For convenience it may be preferable to remove the axis entirely to work on a bench. The
procedures below apply to replacement in situ or on a bench.
The procedures for replacing figure wheels, sector wheels, carry levers and carry arms is
essentially the same. Variations are indicated below.
Whether replacing parts with the axis in place or with the axis removed from the machine the
first step is to remove the top bearing plate.
This should not be undertaken by anyone without mechanical or engineering experience.
To remove an axis requires two people.

Fig. 6.1: Plan View of Engine showing top bearing plates and axes.

70

6 Maintenance and Repair

The following tools and equipment are needed:
1.

Ladders narrow enough to fit on the plinth.

2.

Set of parallel-blade screwdrivers.

3.

Allen keys.

4.

Small pin punches and hammer.

5.

Spring Tensioning Jig

To Remove a Top Bearing Plate
1. Erect a ladder to provide access
from above. Mark the position
of the top collar with marking
ink or by lightly scoring the
shaft. Alternatively, measure
and record the position of the
collar from the top of the shaft.
Repeat this for each of the axes
in the top plate being removed.
(All except the carry arm axes
have springs). This is to ensure
that the collar can be returned
to the same position when the
axis is refitted so that the
counterbalancing spring will be
correctly tensioned when

Fig. 6.2: Top plates.

reassembled.

Cup

Counterbalancing
spring

Collar
Slide blocks

2. Chock up from below each of
the sector wheel axis, figure
wheel axis, and carry lever axis
i.e. place blocks between the
bottom-most collar of each of
the three axes and the bearing
bars on the underside of the
lower framing piece.
Alternatively chock up the axes
using as support the lower

Fig. 6.3: Bell cranks.

71

Bearing bar

Bell cranks

6 Maintenance and Repair

bearing plates that straddles the two middle framing pieces. The sector, figure wheel and
carry lever axes are lifted and lowered by bell cranks (Fig. 6.3) (see Fig. 6.6, pg. 73 for
identification of axes). When the counterbalancing springs are released from compression
and removed, the full weight of the columns bears down on the bronze bell cranks below.
The blocks support the load and prevent the bell crank arms from being overstressed. The
sector axis bell crank is the longest and is the most vulnerable. Special care should be
taken to ensure that this axis is securely supported.
3. Remove the collar at the top of the axis by removing the grub screws or pins with an Allen
key or pin punch. This releases the spring and cup. Keep the spring, collar, cup and pins for
each axis as a set and label them so that they can be refitted to the same axis they were
removed from. The position of the top collar on the shaft is specific for each spring so it is
important that each spring is returned to the axis from which it was removed.
4. The top bearing plates are not doweled to the frame and returning them to their original
position is critical. Carefully measure and record the position of the top bearing plate being
removed referenced to the fixed top plate(s) adjacent to it and to other surrounding fixed
points so that the positions front-to-back and side-to-side can be replicated when
reassembled.
5. Unscrew and remove the large screws
that fix the top bearing plate to the
frame.
6. Unscrew and remove the medium
screws that fix the figure wheel supports,
and the smaller mounting screws for the
steel figure-wheel lock slide-block. The
bronze slide blocks can remain fixed to
the bearing plate (Fig. 6.2). If a slide

Fig 6.3b: Bearing plate and parts.

block overlaps the bearing plate from an

adjacent plate remove this block too. Loosen the fixing screws for the sector zero stop
pillar. The position of the sector stops is critical and should not be disturbed. Check that it is
securely fixed by the screws in the lower bearing plate. If it is not secure, clamp the pillar to
the frame using a metal bar to secure it so that when the top plate is replaced the sector
stop pillar is exactly in its original position.
7. Lift out and remove the bearing plate.

72

6 Maintenance and Repair

To Replace a Part on an Axis
To remove figure wheels, sector wheels, and carry arms.
1. Remove the taper pin securing the collar at the top of the axis. If the axis is on the bench,
remove the collar from the end of the shaft closest to the damaged part.
2. To remove figure wheels from a shaft still in the Engine disengage the lock by removing the
shoulder screw and washer that couple the lock to the drive link at the bottom of the lock
blade (Fig. 7.6 inset, p. 112).
3. Raise the lock to disengage it from the figure wheels and place blocks below hold it in the
retracted position.
4. To remove figure wheels from a shaft still in the Engine first remove the three figure wheel
support pillars. For complete removal unscrew the mounting screws in the bottom bearing
plates. For a possibly easier alternative see Step 18, p. 77.
5. Slide off parts in turn until the one requiring attention is removed.
6. Record order in which parts are removed so when reassembling, parts are returned to their
original positions.

To Replace Carry Levers
1. Unpin the top collar of the detent axis and remove
the collar (Fig. 6.4). It is better to unpin the collar
before the top plate is unscrewed so that the

Fig. 6.4
Detent axis
top collar.

warning axis which supports the detent axis is itself
more securely supported when tapping the pin
punch.
2. Remove in order: the carry lever, detent lever, spring
housing, and detent support arm (Figs 6.5, 6.6). Take
care that the spring does not fall out. Keep the parts
for each assembly in a set and record the original
order on the shaft.
3. Repeat the procedure and remove as many carry mechanisms as necessary to reach the
damaged part.
4. Fit a new carry lever to the detent support arm spigot. If necessary emery-paper the spigot
and/or the internal bore of the carry lever so that the lever rotates smoothly and freely but
without play.
5. Liberally oil all parts when reassembled especially the carry lever bore which is difficult to
access once refitted.

73

6 Maintenance and Repair

Detent
lever

Carry
lever

Spring
housing

Carry
lever
horns

Detent
support
arm
Fig. 6.5: Carriage Mechanism (position of horns is indicative).

6. Replace the removed parts in exactly reverse order to restore the original order on the
shaft.
7. Reassemble by reversing the procedures for removal.
8. Before resuming normal operation each carry lever must be checked for correct warning
action. For checking procedure see Section 7.3, Diagnostic Tests, p. 117.

Removing an Axis
It may be necessary from time to time to remove an axis i.e. a figure wheel, sector wheel,
warning or carry axis.
A complete assembled axis is very heavy. This is especially true of the figure wheel axes and
sector wheel axes. Extreme care must be taken not to damage surrounding components when
lifting or lowering these. Lowering an axis into position must be carefully controlled.
If parts on an axis need to be replaced it may be more convenient to work with the axis on a
bench removed from the Engine, but it is not strictly necessary to remove an axis to replace
the parts on it: figure wheels, sector wheels, carry arms and carry warning mechanisms can be
removed and replaced with the top bearing plate removed and access through the top frame.
Similarly, for access to components below the lower bearing plate an axis can be partially lifted
without removing it entirely.
The procedures below describe the steps required to remove an axis entirely where this is
preferred for convenient access to parts, or necessary in the rare circumstance of an axis
needing to be repaired or replaced.

74

6 Maintenance and Repair

Fig. 6.6: Axis layout.

Figure
wheel
supports

Carry
lever
axis
Even figure
wheel axis

Figure
wheel
zero
stops

Sector
zero
stops

Figure
Wheel
locks
Odd sector
axis

Odd
figure
wheel axis
Reset
stops

Carry arm
axis

Removing an axis should not be undertaken by anyone without mechanical or engineering
experience.
The procedure requires two people.
A COMPLETE ASSEMBED AXIS IS VERY HEAVY. LIFTING AND LOWERING
MUST BE CAREFULLY CONTROLLED TO AVOID INJURY OR DAMAGE

The following tools and equipment will be needed:
1.

Ladders narrow enough to fit on the plinth.

2.

Set of parallel-blade screwdrivers (see Section 6.4, Special Tools, p. 101)

3.

Allen keys.

4.

Small pin punches and hammer.

75

6 Maintenance and Repair

5.

Spring tensioning jig.

Headroom Clearance
Removing an axis entirely through the top frame, requires headroom clearance above the
Engine of the whole shaft length the longest of which is just less than 70 inches. Some of the
axes can be removed without the full shaft length as headroom clearance. In these cases the
axis can be partially lifted out and the lower end slid out between the two horizontal framing
pieces supporting the upper and lower bearing plates.
The clearance between the two horizontal framing pieces is 32 inches.
The basic procedure for removing any of the four axes is the same and applies equally to the
figure wheel, sector wheel, carry, and warning axes.
To remove any of the vertical axes, or replace parts on it without removing it, the top bearing
plate needs to be removed.

To Remove an Axis
1.

To remove an even axis, set the Engine to 0 (FULL CYCLE).
To remove an odd axis, set the Engine to 25 (HALF CYCLE) units.
Even axes are: 6th, 4th, 2nd difference figure wheel columns, the results figure wheel
column, and the associated sector, carry and warning axes where present (Fig. 2.3, p. 8,
and Fig. 6.6, p. 75).
Odd axes are: the 7th, 5th, 3rd, and 1st difference figure wheel columns and the associated
sector, carry and warning axes where present.

2.

Remove the top bearing plate (see p. 71 above).

To Remove a Carry Arm Axis
3.

Release the bevel gear at the base of the axis by unscrewing or unpinning.

4.

Have an assistant hold the bevel gear and key which will be released when the axis is
lifted clear. Lift the axis clear, through the lower bearing plate.

76

6 Maintenance and Repair

To Remove a Carry Lever Axis
5.

First remove the associated carry arm axis using the procedure above.

6.

Remove the carry reset stops by unscrewing the pair of fixing screws in the top and
bottom bearing plates (Fig. 6.6, p. 75).

7.

Set all the carry levers to the disabled (inoperative/disconnected) position i.e. on the
fourth detent.

8.

Release the bobbin at the bottom end of the axis by unpinning or removing the grub
screws. The bobbin is in the fork of the bell crank in the drive section below level of the
bottom bearing plates.

9.

Mark the quadrant pinion and the rack to record where they mesh so that they can be
remeshed in the same position on reassembly.

10. Mark the top figure wheel to record the position of the carry lever horn.
11. Lift the axis clear of the lower bearing plate and out of the frame. Have an assistant hold
down the quadrant pinion as the axis lifts out. The pinion slides off the key as the axis is
raised.

To Remove a Figure Wheel Axis
12. Remove the carry arm axis as described above.
13. Remove the carry lever axis as described above.
14. Remove the sector zero stop pillar by unscrewing and removing the two fixing screws in
the lower bearing plate.
15. Rotate all the sectors 180⁰.
16. Disconnect the figure wheel lock by removing the shoulder screw and washer that couple
the lock to the drive link at the bottom of the lock blade (Fig. 7.6 inset, p. 112).
17. Remove the lock by lifting it clear through the top frame.
18. On the lower bearing plate unscrew and remove one of the two fixing screws securing
each of the three figure wheel support pillars. Slightly loosen the remaining screw on each
of the three pillars and twist the support until the figure wheel supports are clear of the
figure wheels and the figure wheels are released.
19. Mark the quadrant pinion and the rack to record where they mesh so that it can be
replaced in the same position on reassembly.
20. Release the bobbin and drive pinion by removing the taper pins.
21. Lift the axis clear.

77

6 Maintenance and Repair

To Remove a Sector Axis
To remove a sector wheel axis does not require the prior removal of the carry, warning or
figure wheel axis.
1. Remove the top bearing plate (see p. 71 above).
2. Mark or scribe the outline of the sector zero stop directly onto the lower bearing plate so
that the stop can be exactly positioned when refitted (Fig. 6.6, p. 75).
3. Remove the sector zero stop by unscrewing and removing the fixing two screws in the
bottom bearing plate.
4. Release the lower bobbin from the bell crank by unpinning or unscrewing.
5. Mark the quadrant pinion and the rack to record where they mesh so that it can be
replaced in the same position on reassembly.
6. Release the circular motion pinion from the shaft by unpinning or unscrewing the pinion
boss from the shaft.
7. Lift the axis out.

Refitting an Axis
To refit an axis reverse the procedures for removal.
1. Ensure that the geared quadrants or pinions are in their original meshing positions with
their respective racks when the shafts are refitted.
2. To refit a carry lever axis lower it
from above in line with the final
position. Thread the carry lever
horns through the correct figure
wheel teeth using the reference
marks made before removal (Fig.
6.7).
3. Before lowering the axis through
the bottom plate clean the bore
and the shaft to avoid scoring by
debris and lubricate well to ease
insertion.

Fig. 6.7: Position of horns.
Reference
marks

4. Before tightening the fixing screws
for the top bearing plate check the

78

Carry lever
horn

Figure
wheel

6 Maintenance and Repair

pitch position by comparison with neighbouring plates and front-to-back reference points
from which registration measurements were taken before removal.
5. When replacing the top collar use
the spring tensioning jig (Fig. 6.8) to
re-tension the spring to its original
setting. Set and lock the central
threaded rod to the original depth of
the collar marked earlier on the
shaft. Press the jig down to depress
the spring until the threaded rod acts
as an end stop. Hold the jig down
while fixing the collar with a pin
in or Allen screws. Two people may

Fig. 6.8: Spring tensioning jig.

be required – one to keep the jig
depressed on the spring, the other to tighten the fixing screws on the collar. Remove the jig.
The springs must be returned to the same shafts from which they were removed. The
position of the collar determines the correct tension of that particular spring so each spring
must remain matched to its original shaft and the collar restored to its original position.

79

6 Maintenance and Repair

6.2 Lubrication
The general principle is to lubricate all moving parts.
EXCEPTIONS

The following are run DRY:
1.

Figure wheel gear teeth

2.

Sector wheel gear teeth

3.

Carry assemblies (part)

The following are lubricated with graphite powder:
1.

Vertical printer racks

2.

Print and punch wheels

3.

Horizontal racks in stereotype apparatus

Figure wheel shafts, and all vertical axes are lubricated with oil. But figure wheel and sector
wheel teeth are run dry – this to avoid accumulation of dust and debris that might become
abrasive and/or obstruct correct operation.
The small moving parts of carry mechanisms and rotating parts on the vertical axes (warning
lever axis, figure and sector wheel axes) are all oiled. However, the ends of the carry arms and
carry levers (the lozenges that intersect during carriage) are run dry (Figs. 6.5, 6.6).
The vertical printing-racks, print and punch wheels, and horizontal racks in the output
apparatus are not lubricated with oil as the surface tension of oils causes adhesion and
stiffness in the movement of adjacent parts. These parts are lubricated with graphite powder.

Vertical Axes – Drip Tray
The figure wheels, sector wheels and carry levers have a central vertical shaft. Figure wheels,
sector wheels and the lever assemblies rotate on these shafts, and the bearing surfaces, which
are not directly accessible, need to be oiled.

80

6 Maintenance and Repair

The vertical axes are oiled from above. The oil drains down the shaft to lubricate the wheel
bearings and any excess drains down into a shallow drip tray that runs the length of underside
of the Engine. Oil the vertical axes liberally so that there is sufficient oil to drain all the way
down.
The drip tray should be emptied from time to time.

Frequency
The frequency of lubrication service depends on usage. An Engine run daily will need to be
lubricated every 4 weeks. This typically corresponds to between 500 to 600 cycles.
For occasional use the full lubrication schedule can be carried out less frequently. Operators
should anyway monitor the machine and lubricate specific parts more frequently as needed
outside scheduled servicing.
A critical bearing is the thrust bearing for the main cam stack shaft. This is located in the lower
bearing plate and takes the main load of the cam stack. This bearing is not directly accessible
but is oiled through an oiling hole in the top bevel gear. Oil drains down from the oiling hole to
the thrust bearing via a hidden channel in the shaft. This bearing should be oiled whenever any
oiling is done i.e. frequently and liberally.

Lubricants
Grease is used on gear wheels in all power drive trains as well as on the bearing surfaces of
cams and sliding cam followers.
Three different grades of oil are used: thin spindle oil is used to lubricate shafts, spindles
journal bearings, links and pivots. A thicker oil is used for lubricating slide ways, V-slides, and
the larger sliding racks and rack housings as spindle oil would run off and not be retained. The
stereotype table dashpot oil has a separate specification (see table p. 82).
Some bearings have oiling holes others not. Where there are no oiling holes the shaft should
be oiled on both sides i.e. where it enters and leaves the framing piece.
Dry lubricant in the form of graphite powder is used for the printer wheels, punch wheels,
vertical and horizontal racks of the output apparatus. This is to avoid adhesion through surface
tension and accumulation of dust and debris if liquid lubricants were used.

81

6 Maintenance and Repair

Food-grade oil can be used to avoid the odour of conventional oils. If, for example the Engine
is displayed in a domestic environment without a display case, oil odour might be a
consideration.

Oils

Products

Shafts, links, spindles,
bearings

Light spindle oil
‘Hydroslide HG220’ by D. A Stuart Oils Ltd
‘Foodlube Hi-Power 22’ by Rocol
‘Varmulti 220’ by Varol Lubricants

Slideways , rack-housings

‘Crown Multilube 68’ by D.A. Stuart Oils Ltd
‘Crown Multilube 150’ by D. A. Stuart Oils
Ltd

Grease

‘Foodlube Universal Grease’ by Rocol
Castrol LM

Application
Plastic pipettes are recommended for dispensing oil (Fig. 6.8). These
offer more control than do oil cans especially when dispensing small
quantities. Reaching parts that are partially obstructed is also easier
with a long, slim, and flexible plastic spout.
Graphite powder is applied using a ‘puffer’ and small paint brush. A
feeler gauge, tapered in thickness towards the end, inserted between

Fig. 6.8b

adjacent abutting racks, print and punch wheels, helps to open gaps
for better penetration of graphite powder.
Grease is easily applied by hand from a tub rather than using a grease gun.
Lubrication is messy and Latex or Nitrile gloves are recommended.
A full lubrication schedule takes up to two hours.

82

6 Maintenance and Repair

Lubrication Schedule
The number of oiling and greasing points is large – well into the hundreds.
The following lubrication schedule identifies most but not all lubrication and greasing points as
not all parts requiring lubrication are easily accessible for illustration. Parts not specifically
identified but similar in function to those illustrated should be lubricated as well.
The illustrations have a long view to identify the location of the lubrication point where this is
not obvious, a detailed close-up of the application point(s), and specific advisory comments
where relevant.

83

6 Maintenance and Repair

Lubrication Schedule
Calculation

Vertical Axes
Oil from top of
Engine.
All vertical axes
-

Carry axes
Warning axes
Figure wheel
axes
Sector axes.

Vertical Locks
and Zero Stops
Oil from top of
Engine.
Zero stops on
all figure wheel
axes.
Vertical locks
on all figure
wheel axes.

Oil liberally – oil
drains down.
Oil bottom of
vertical axes at
bearing plate
entry.

FigureWheel Zero
Stops Slider
Blocks
8 slider
bocks on
lower
bearing
plates.

Collapsing
Link
Mechanism

Vertical Locks
for Figure
Wheel Axes

(Located
th
under 7
difference
column).
Oil slider and
all link pivots.

Oil where
locks enter
lower bearing
plate.
8 Oiling points.

84

6 Maintenance and Repair

Carry Lever
Warning
Pawl Pivots

Horizontal Spindle
Rack Sliders
Oil rack sliders.

210 Pawls
on 7 Axes.

30 racks in all – 15
accessible from rear,
15 from front.

Access from
rear of
Engine.

Helps if racks are
displaced to expose
slides i.e. non-zeros
on results column.

Vertical-Lock Lever
Pivots

Oil spindles where
they enter bearing
blocks.

Upper and Lower
2 Oiling holes.

30 Oiling points.

Also oil bronze
lever forks.
3 lever fork pivots
(2 on lower lever).
6 Oiling points.

Lower Pivot

Scoop
Clutch
Lever
Cable
Pulleys

Scoop Clutch
Lever Bias
Weight Pulley

Oil.

85

6 Maintenance and Repair

Output Apparatus
Printing
Spindle Bearings

Inking
Roller
Drive Link
Shaft

Oil spindle bearings on
the outside of bronze
strips so that any oil
spillage drops onto the
framing pieces. The
framing protects the
print wheels below.
These should not have
any oil – they are
lubricated with graphite
power.

Inking
Roller Drive
Shaft

If unsure, cover the
printwheels.
Oil both sets of bearing
strips i.e. front and rear:

Oiling hole

30 Spindle bearings
60 Oiling points.

Paper Roll Drum
Shaft Bearing

4 Oiling points –
front and back at
both ends of
shaft.

Inking
Roller Link
Pivot
Inking
Roller Cam
Follower

1 Oiling
point.

1 Oiling
point.
Oiling hole.

86

6 Maintenance and Repair

Ink Rollers
Oil the shaft bearings of 4
rollers in the inking system:
- inkpot roller
- spreader roller
- transfer roller
- inking roller.
Take care to avoid oil dripping
onto the rubber rollers.

Print Wheels
Deposit graphite powder using a blower (‘Puffer’ bulb).
Spread with fine brush.
Light dusting on print heads (lower illustration).
Heavier on lock teeth on upper side of print wheels (top
illustration).
Wheels do not need to rotate when applying. Can use
tapered feeler gauge inserted between wheels to create
gaps and aid penetration.
Recommended to run a few cycles after application.
Paper Roll Drum
Drive Link Shaft
1 Oiling point.
Oiling hole
Also oil all other
link pivots in the
drive train.

Printing Wheel
Lock Cam
Follower Shaft
Oil both ends
where shaft
enters the frame.

87

6 Maintenance and Repair

Stereotyping

Upper Pawl Shaft
2 Oiling points –
front and back .
Repeat for column
pawls over on left.

Falling
Weight
Pulleys
1 Oiling
point.

2 Oiling Points –
front and back.

Lower Pawl
Shaft

Vertical
Rack Lock
Pivots

2 Oiling points
- front and back.
Repeat for
column pawl
over on left.

Pattern Wheel Shafts
2 Oiling points – front and
back.
Repeat on column pattern
wheel shaft over on the left.
2 Oiling points – front and
back.

Dovetail Slides for Stereotyping Wheel Punches
4 Oiling points:
Oil angles as shown as well as the straight run.
2 slides (front and back) for large punch wheels.
2 slides (front and back) for small wheel punches.
(View shown is dovetail for small punch wheels)
Also oil dovetail slides for punch wheel locks (crab
locks) – 4 oiling points (not shown), and crab lock
bearings – 8 oiling points.

88

Punch Wheel
Dovetail Slider
Cam Follower
Shaft
Oil both ends
where it leaves
and enters the
frame.

6 Maintenance and Repair

Horizontal Racks for
Punch Wheels

Auxiliary
Crank Handle
Shaft

Deposit graphite powder
using a blower (‘puffer’
bulb).

Remove oil
screw.

Spread with fine brush.

Oil – I oiling
point.

2 Application Areas:
- Racks and teeth
immediately under print
wheels (start on top).
- Narrow end of racks at
opposite end.

Replace oil
screw.

Stereotype Punch
Wheels Large (top) and
Small (inset)

Sliding Clutch
(Rewind)

Use graphite powder.

Push back the fork
to slide back the
bobbin.
This exposes the
shaft.

Oil the shaft and
fork.

Can be powdered
without removal but
access difficult.
Use tapered
feeler gauge to
prise gaps to aid
penetration.

Lubricate in situ and
thoroughly when
removed for cleaning.

End-of-page
Drop Weight
Trip-Lever
2 Oiling
Points.
Both ends of
lever shaft
where it
enters frame
on each side.

Rewind Clutch
Pawls
Oil 2 pivots for
each pawl.
○

Two pawls 180
apart.

Changeover
shaft
2 Oiling
Points – front
and back.

89

6 Maintenance and Repair

Travelling Platform V-groove
Slides – Column-Column.
2 Sliders – front and rear of
Engine.
Oil both faces of V.
Oil all exposed runs.
Travelling Platform V-groove Slides
– Line-Line
2 Sliders – front and rear of Output
Apparatus.
Oil both faces of V.
Column-Column Pinion Drive Shaft.
Shaft runs full depth from front to back of
Engine.
Figure shows front rack and pinion.
Identical arrangement at rear.
Oil shaft wherever it enters or leaves
frame.

Travelling Platform
V-groove Slides –
Line-Line
Oil through oiling
holes around
frame. 3 each side.
6 total.
Travelling Platform
V-groove Slides –
Column-Column

Key way
slide

Oil through oiling
holes around frame
at front and rear of
Engine.
3 oiling points each
side. 6 total.

90

6 Maintenance and Repair

Cam
Follower
Bearing

Large Drive
Gear
Bearings
for Output
Apparatus

Trip Levers
Oil each end of
both trip lever
shafts and the
two trip lever
clusters.

Lower Oscillating
Bar Drive Lever Cam
Follower Shaft
Oil both ends
where it enters and
leaves frame.
4 Oiling points.

Column-toColumn
Bevel Gear
Drive
Oil bearings
at each end
of shaft.

Rocker Lever Pivots
Line rocker lever
pivot (shown being
oiled)
Also oil column
rocker lever pivot
shown mirrored
left.

91

6 Maintenance and Repair

Auxiliary Crank
Drive Gear and
Pinion

Column-column
Travelling
Platform Drive
Pinion
Grease:

Grease both.

2 Pinions.
front and rear.

Lower
Oscillating Bar
Drive Lever
Cams

Output
Apparatus
Cams

Grease
2 cams.

Grease.
Also camshaft drive
gear on left of
cams.

ColumColumn
Travelling
Platform
Bevel Drive
Gear
Grease.

Grease Large
and Small
Output
Apparatus
Drive Wheels.
Access from
rear of Engine .

Crab
Lock
Pivot
Points

Access from
front of Engine.

Travelling
Platform Rack
and Pinion
Drive
Grease.
Viewed from
underside.

92

4 Oiling
Points.

6 Maintenance and Repair

Drive
Horizontal Bar
Slider
Supports
Oil 3 sets of
sliders along
length of bars.
Grease sliders
where they
enter the

frame.
Cam Stack Bevel Gears and 4:1
Crank Reduction Gear
Top to bottom:
- drive gear (4:1)
- Fam Stack upper bevel gears
- drive gear pinion (4:1)
- Fam stack lower bevel gear.
Grease.

Circular Motion
Rack Sliders
Access from
front.
8 racks in 2 rows
of 4.
Odd axis shown.
Evens above
(obscured).
Getting oil in
can be difficult.

93

6 Maintenance and Repair

Cams and Cam Followers
Oil all roller followers.
Do not grease cams with
roller followers (circular
motion cams – upper set).
Grease all cams with slider
followers (vertical motion
cams – lower set).
16 Vertical Motion Cams
with slider followers. 28
cams total.
Be sure not to miss cam
followers concealed under
the overhang of the cam
above.

Drive Link
Pivots

Warning Axis Rack
and Pinion

Camfollower
shaft
bearings.

Concealed in
Illustration behind
lower framing piece.

Oil all
linkages
between
followers
and
horizontal
sliding bars.

Oil 7 racks and
pinions.
Access from rear.

Bell Crank
Bearings
Oil all oil holes
in each boss.
Also oil bell
crank shafts
where they
enter and
leave lower
frame front
and rear.

94

6 Maintenance and Repair

Carry Mechanism
Intermittent Circular
Motion
Grease:
twin toothed drive (2
teeth)
phasing gear teeth.

register wheel and
detent
register pinion
single impact-tooth (at
rear of pinion).
Oil:
sprung lever register roller
bearing.

Main Drive Bearings
Oil (oiling holes):
Main Crank Drive Shaft:
Two bearings
behind main drive gear
behind chapter disc phasing
gear.

Output apparatus drive shaft (at
base of cam stack).
Oiling hole.

95

6 Maintenance and Repair

Cam Shaft Thrust Bearing
Remove oiling hole screw in upper bevel
gear at top of cam stack.
Oil liberally. Wait for oil to drain down
hidden oil channel to annular cup bearing
at lower bearing plate and add more oil.

Bell Crank Drive
Link Pivots
Oil all link
pivots on both
horizontal bars.

Carry Arm Circular Motion Drive
Grease:
7 sets of bevel gears.
Access from rear of Engine.

Carry Arm Circular Motion Drive Shaft Bearings
Oiling holes
Oil bearing blocks at both ends of shaft – cam stack end
and output apparatus end.

96

6 Maintenance and Repair

Control Levers
Oil:
lifting levers

H

Oil:
bar slots
release lever pivot

Uncoupling Clutch Control
Levers
Oil:
locking Lever (rear)
clutch Lever (front)

Results Drive Train Test and Lubrication (Graphite Test)
Results are transferred from the results column to the printing and stereotyping apparatus via
a transmission train consisting of sectors, racks, spindles, vertical racks, printing wheels,
horizontal racks and punch wheels.
Stiffness in any of the thirty separate digits produces a back-load on the last sector axis which
can cause timing anomalies. The train cannot normally be broken to isolate sections for faultfinding.
The following procedure allows each of the thirty digit trains to be exercised and investigated
separately. The procedure will allow identification of stiff trains and indicate which parts of
the train need specific lubrication.
1.

Follow the procedure for entering initial values (Section 4.3, p. 23) setting the results
column to all ‘9’s and all the rest of the figure wheels on the remaining columns to zero.

2.

Advance to 26 units on the chapter disc by turning the main crank. This frees each of the
wheels on the last sector column.

3.

Rotate each of the last sector wheels in turn and check for stiffness (See Note below).

4.

Apply additional graphite to the print wheels, vertical racks, stereotype horizontal racks
and punch wheels in all the drive trains that are stiff.

97

6 Maintenance and Repair

Note
The sector wheel gear teeth might have sharp edges and gripping by hand can cause minor
injury. If the sector wheels are turned by hand gloves or other finger protection should be
used.
An alternative to turning sector wheels by hand is to exercise each drive train by turning the
horizontal spindles. There are several special tools available to do this. See 6.4, Special Tools,
p. 101.

98

6 Maintenance and Repair

6.3 Cleaning
Intricate oiled parts are difficult to clean and routine stripping for cleaning purposes is not
generally practical – this is a substantial task and runs the risk of altering fine settings. Intricate
parts should be removed for cleaning as required.
The accumulation of dust should be prevented as far as possible.
The Engines should be covered and sealed when transported outside a building or in dusty
environments where building or site work is being carried out.
The London Engine has a lockable wheeled pull-apart glass display case that can be completely
or partially removed in two halves.
With the case open and the two halves wheeled away the Engine stands as an island exhibit
with unobstructed access all round.
With the case correctly closed the two halves butt together and create an effective seal against
dust and debris.
The London Engine is kept covered by default to prevent tampering and to protect against dust
and debris, and opened out only for demonstration, maintenance and repair.
The US Engine does not have a glass display case and is left open in normal circumstances but
covered and sealed during periods of site work.
Steel parts should be cleaned by wiping with a soft cloth and protected with a light film of
lubricating oil being careful not to oil the moving parts intentionally run dry (see Section 6.2,
Lubrication, p. 80).
Greased parts (gears, racks and pinions, cams and cam followers) should have old,
contaminated, caked, or accumulated grease cleaned off from time to time before regreasing.
The V-slides on the travelling platforms of the output apparatus tends to accumulate wear
products which reduce the ease of movement. When this becomes noticeable, remove the
bronze trays and the sliding platforms and clean the slides before re-oiling.
If bright bronze or steel parts discolour or corrode, clean with a soft cloth and a fine liquid metal
polishing compound. Apply a light film of oil taking care not to oil moving parts that are
intentionally run dry.

99

6 Maintenance and Repair

The vertical axes (figure wheel, sector wheel, carry lever) are oiled from above and oil drains
down into the drip tray below. Oil tends to spread onto the figure and sector wheels which
should be run dry. Wipe with soft lint-free cloth from time to time.

100

6 Maintenance and Repair

6.4 Special Tools
Parallel face screwdrivers
Extensive use is made of slotted machine
screws. Conventional taper-blade drivers
tend to damage the slots and are not easily
obtainable with the large blade width
required to span the full length of the slot.
The set of drivers shown have parallel faced
blades the largest of which fits the largest
machine screw head.
There is a hex section in the shaft
immediately behind the blade to take a
spanner for full tightening.

Fig. 6.9: Screwdrivers.
Hex section to take
spanner

Spring tensioning jig
The spring tensioning jig is used to compress
the counterbalancing springs at the top end of
the vertical axes (see Fig. 6.2, p. 71). Each
spring is sandwiched between a top collar on
the shaft and a cup on the upper bearing
plate. The force exerted by the spring is
proportional to the amount of compression
and therefore the position of the collar below
the top of the shaft. Each spring needs to be
set individually. The distance from the collar
to the top of the shaft is set by adjusting the
Fig. 6.10: Spring Tensioning Jig.
threaded rod and locking it with the knurled
nut. The jig is sleeved over the shaft and pressed down on the top collar until stopped by the threaded
rod. While the collar is held down it is pinned or grub-screwed to fix it in position.

101

6 Maintenance and Repair
Warning claw adjuster
The warning claw adjuster is used to tweak
the warning claw to ensure that the amount
that the carry lever is nudged by one of the
nibs on the barrel of the figure wheel is
correct to ensure that the carry lever is
advanced to the second indent i.e. from
unwarned to warned (See Figs 6.5, p. 74 and
Fig. 6.6, p. 75).

Fig. 6.11: Warning claw adjuster.

The claw can be tweaked to close or open the
gap between it and the figure wheel. The tool
is wrapped from behind the mechanism to
reach the claw. See Section 7, Trouble
Shooting, p. 119. The adjustment is carried
out from behind the engine.
Fig. 6.12 shows the position of the tool for an
even carry lever axis. Alternate axes are
handed so the tool position for an odd axis is
a mirror image of the configuration in Fig.
6.12.

Fig. 6.12: Warning claw adjustment.

Printer Roller-bar spanners
Paper is pressed against the printer wheels to
take an inked impression of the results. A stiff
flat rubbery bearing strip secured in the paper
roller-bar presses the paper against the type
face (Fig. 6.13). The flat on this strip must be in
the same plane as the plane of the type face
for an even impression. The angle of the flat is
adjusted by rotational adjustment of the roller
bar in its mounting. The two flat spanners are
used to adjust the angle of the roller bar.

Fig 6.13: Paper roller bar.

One spanner (lower spanner in Fig. 6.14) fits
onto a flat on the roller bar and is used for fine
adjustment of the angle. The other fits on onto
the square nut securing the roller bar. This is
used to ease off the securing nut during
adjustment and to tighten the nut after the
correct angle has been set.

Fig. 6.14: Roller-bar adjusting spanners.

102

6 Maintenance and Repair

Paper Roll Magazine
The paper roll magazine can be used when
restocking the paper supply on the feed barrel
(Section 5, Replacing the Print Roll, p. 44).
It is used to hold the paper roll while it is
being wound onto the feed barrel. The
magazine hooks over the roller-bar and the
side cheeks fit into slots at each end of the
roller-bar. It is used only when the paper
stock is being replenished. It drops into
locating slots and is removed by lifting off.
There is no other fixing.
Fig. 6.15: Removable paper roll magazine.

Output Drive-train Tools
The three tools shown (Figs. 6.17, 6.18, 6.19)
are used to investigate and exercise the thirty
drive trains connecting the figure wheels on
the results column to the corresponding print
and punch wheels in the output apparatus.
The tools allow the individual transmission
trains to be investigated one at a time to
identify obstructions and to assess stiffness.
The elements of the drive trains for each of
the thirty digits include sectors, racks,
spindles, vertical racks, printing wheels,
horizontal racks and punch wheels. The trains
can be exercised by turning the sector wheels
by hand (Section 6.2, p. 97). The tools in Figs.
6.17, 6.18, and 6.19 offer an alternative to
hand-turning the final sectors.
Each of the tools clamps onto a spindle (Fig.
6.16). Rotating a spindle using one of the
tools exercises all the elements in that train.

Fig. 6.16: Output Spindles.

103

30 spindles in 2
runs of 15

6 Maintenance and Repair

Brass Grip
The manual spindle grip is shown in Fig. 6.17.
The brass grip is opened out to be placed on
the spindle and closed to clamp. It provides a
fast and effective means of exercising the
trains. It is easy reposition after each
rotational movement and the brass jaws
protect the steel spindles from getting
scored.
Fig. 6.17

Split Boss
The split boss (Fig. 6.18) clamps onto the spindle using Allen
screws. It can be operated by hand using a handle that screws
into the threaded hole shown at the top. It is fiddly to reposition
and less convenient to use than the brass grip for hand turning.
The spilt boss was used to drive stiff trains when ‘running in’
after the original assembly: a drive gear, driven by an electric
motor, meshed with the teeth on the boss and drove the train in
a continuously reversing cycle. The stiffness in the trains was
eventually alleviated by increasing the clearance between the
printer vertical racks and reducing the bearing surface between
adjacent racks. Its inclusion here is partly historical but also as a
contingency against.

Fig. 6.18

Stiffness Gauge
Like the split boss tool the split head of this
tool (Fig. 6.19) clamps onto the spindle using
Allen screws. It can be used to rotate the
spindle by hand but that is not its main
purpose and it is less convenient to use than
the brass grip. The main purpose of this tool is
Fig. 6.19
to measure the stiffness in the train. Once
clamped to the spindle a weight is hung from
one or another of the grooves and increased until the spindle turns. Any measures taken to relieve
stiffness can be registered by the by the same weight being able to turn the spindle when hung from
a groove-position closer to the head. In addition to these comparative measurements, the gauge can
be used for absolute measurements of torque by taking the product of the weight and the length of
the lever arm .

104

6 Maintenance and Repair

Gear-wheel Adjuster
The wheel adjuster is used to pull a sector or figure wheel round and
position it. It is used when the wheel should be free to turn but is stiff
or subject to some resistance, but not jammed. Using the adjuster is
preferable to using a screwdriver: it is less likely to damage the wheel
and the delicacy of the hook prevents too much force being used. It
also protects fingers from sharp edges on the gear teeth.
Fig. 6.20

105

7 Trouble Shooting

7.

Trouble Shooting

This section provides diagnostic tests to aid fault-finding, and provides solutions to the most
common faults.
7.1 Engine Jams, Damage and Parts Failure
The single most disruptive feature operating the Engine is the Engine locking up and the crank
seizing.
Jamming can be an indication that the integrity of the calculation has been compromised and
is most often not the catastrophe it first appears to be.
Locking mechanisms are designed to jam the Engine in the event that a figure wheel, print
wheel, or parts of the transmission train occupy an indeterminate position. Not all jams are
caused by these security mechanisms.
Jamming as a form of error detection is a distinctive feature of the design. While jams are
rarely catastrophic all jams have the potential to damage mechanisms.
Causes of jams should be sought, understood and remedied before returning the Engine to
normal operation.
The Engine is adjusted when first assembled. Adjusted parts are then pinned in their correct
fixed positions. After this, parts failure in normal operation is rare, and most but not all jams
do not cause damage.
The parts most vulnerable to damage are the bronze carry levers at the rear of the Engine.
These 210 levers are too delicate to jam: they distort, partially fracture or simply snap.
Feedback to the operator through ‘feel’ is critical to halting the Engine in time to avoid damage
or breakage. Insensitive or forceful cranking can easily strip an entire column of carry levers.
It is a non-trivial task to replace broken carry levers (see Section 6, Maintenance and Repair)
and such breakages should be avoided.
Under no circumstances should the crank be driven against unusual or unexpected resistance,
whether the Engine is jammed or not.

106

7 Trouble Shooting

Breakages and damage most commonly result from operator error when setting up the initial
values or from the Engine being tampered with while unattended.
For security both the main

Fixing
screw

crank handle and the

Main crank

auxiliary crank handle should
be removed if the Engine is
left unattended especially in
a public space. The handles
are easily dismounted by
removing a single large fixing
screw and pulling and/or
twisting the handle off the
boss. The two handles and
their mountings are identical.
The risk of unauthorised
tampering while the Engine is
left unattended should not be

Stub with
handle
removed

Auxiliary
crank

underestimated. The Engine
Parallel blade
screwdriver

can be turned using the stub
only (i.e. with the crank
handle removed) though only
with difficulty past unit 10

Fig 7.1: Crank Handles.

when the locks come in.
There is also the risk of the carry levers being tampered with and moved from the unwarned
(first detent) to warned or carried position while the Engine is parked at 0.
It is recommended that before operating the Engine after it has been left unattended at 0
(FULL CYCLE) that all even carry levers are checked visually to ensure that they are all in the
unwarned position (first detent). The even carry levers are those associated with the 2nd, 4th,
6th difference axes and the results axis (see Fig. 2.3, p. 8, for axis identification).
Operator error can result from carelessness, inadvertent or deliberate deviation from the
specified procedure for setting initial values (not withdrawing or not securing manual locks for
example).

107

7 Trouble Shooting

The setting up procedures have been carefully tested over many hundreds of calculating
sessions. No attempt should be made to ‘improve’ on them by omitting any of the steps even if
they appear at face value to be ‘unnecessary’.
A thumbnail checklist is provided in Appendix 10.2, p. 141 as a setting-up aid so that each step
can be checked off as it is performed and no steps omitted.
Damage from a jam may not be immediately evident. Overstressed parts may be weakened by
overextension or partial fracture, and fail later. Distorted parts may still operate but later their
action can become marginal leading to intermittent faults or final failure.
Once a jam is cleared neighbouring parts should be examined for damage.

7.2 Clearing Jams
The most common cause of a jam is cranking too fast or cranking too slowly. Jams typically
caused by over-cranking are different from those caused by under-cranking.
The commonest jams are phasing gear jams (cranking too fast), lock jams (too slowly) and
sector wheel jams (too slow).
Cranking unevenly – going fast during part of the cycle when the load is light, and slowly when
there is resistance – can produce jams of either kind.
The correct speed at which to operate the Engine is at an even rate of 8 seconds per result.
This corresponds to one turn of the crank in 2 seconds (with the 4:1 reduction gear fitted)
given there are four turns of the crank for one calculating cycle (see Fig. 3.1, p. 15 for location
of 4:1 reduction gear).
The following are the commonest kinds of jam.

Phasing Gear Jams (Cranking Too Fast)
A jam at 10 or 35 units is an indication that the jam may be a phasing gear jam with a jam at 35
units more common.

108

7 Trouble Shooting

This jam is caused by fouling of

Fig. 7.2: Phasing.

the mechanism that controls the
intermittent circular motions of

Chapter disc

the carry arms.
Phasing gear

This is the commonest jam in
normal operation and is the first

Roller indent

source of a jam to check for.

Register pinion
Impact tooth

If the Engine is driven too fast the
register pinion driving the
intermittent circular motion tends
to overrun. At the start of the
next intermittent motion cycle
the phasing gear does not mesh

Roller

with the pinion and the impact
teeth jam.

The overruns occur when passing through 0 or 25 though the jams occur ten units later at 10
and 35 units respectively.
Phasing gear jams are easily cleared but checks should be made for damage (Step 5, below).
The phasing gear is the large gear to which the chapter disc is fixed. The register pinion is at 4o’clock to the phasing gear as seen facing the chapter disc (Fig. 7.2).

To Clear a Phasing Gear Jam

Fig. 7.3: Unjamming the Phasing Gear.

109

7 Trouble Shooting

1. Insert a large screwdriver at a downward angle into the register pinion teeth (Fig. 7.3).
2. Place the shaft of the screwdriver against the cam stack frame, press gently downwards to
lever the pinion in an anticlockwise direction as seen from an operator facing the chapter
disc. There is little load on the pinion and gentle pressure is all that is needed. Usually no
more than one downward movement is necessary. Remove the screwdriver.
3. Gently test the crank handle for movement using the technique for incremental motion
described on page (See Section 3.2, p. 17). Under no circumstances crank the Engine if
there is resistance.
4. If the jam is cleared the Engine will cycle, the phasing gear will automatically remesh at the
start of the next intermittent motion cycle without loss of information or disruption to the
calculation.
5. Stop the Engine at the next zero (FULL CYCLE) and check that the roller on the sprung roller
arm is properly seated in the indent in the register pinion disc (Fig. 7.2). If it is not properly
seated then advance the pinion using the screwdriver until the roller is correctly seated.
6. Check for bent or damaged carry levers on all carry arm axes (Figs 7.4, 7.5) especially the
first (lowest) lever and lever 16 half way up the axis. It is the long limb with the lozenge on
the end that is the likeliest victim of breakage.

Fig. 7.4: Carry Lever.

Fig. 7.5: Carry Mechanism.

7. If the jam is not cleared, proceed to the next most likely cause.

Note
When the register pinion is correctly phased the sprung roller that presses against the register
pinion seats neatly in the indent when the Engine is at zero (FULL CYCLE) (Fig. 7.2, inset). If it
does not, there is a phasing issue that should be investigated.

110

7 Trouble Shooting

Throwing the register pinion out of sync is the limiting factor determining the maximum speed
with which the Engine can safely be run.
The ease with which the register pinion gets out of mesh partly depends on the strength of the
spring biasing the roller arm. The weaker the spring the lower the speed at which the pinion
will be thrown out of sync. Renewing the spring with a full strength replacement will reduce
the frequency of phasing gear jams.
If the spring biasing the roller arm is replaced or strengthened the Engine should not be run
any faster than the recommended 2 seconds for each turn of the crank (with the standard 4:1
reduction gear fitted).

Lock Jams (Cranking Too Slowly)
A jam at 35 units is an indication that the jam may be a jammed figure wheel lock.
Lock jams are most commonly caused by cranking too slowly or cranking erratically or
hesitantly through the points in the cycle at which the locks are inserted.
The action of the locks produce a short shock load on the crank handle and without experience
the tendency is for the operator to slow down or check the cranking movement. This reduces
the momentum of the figure wheel rotation and they may not rotate fully to receive the locks.
Lock jams are caused by obstructions to the locks entering between the figure wheel teeth.
Each column of figure wheels has a vertical lock that runs the full length of the axis (Fig. 6.6, p.
75). The lock has a wedge-shaped edge that is inserted between the teeth of the figure wheels
four times each cycle (at 0, 10, 25, 35 timing units). It is the action of the locks that creates the
characteristic rhythmic slapping sound of the Engine in operation.
In normal use the locks enter freely between the figure wheel teeth. The wedge-shaped
leading edge of the lock corrects small derangements and realigns the wheels (self-correction)
as it enters.
If a figure wheel is deranged by more than 2.25⁰ its value is indeterminate between two digits.
The lock will be obstructed by the edge of the gear tooth, fail to insert between the teeth, and
the Engine will jam.

111

7 Trouble Shooting

Shoulder screw

Fig. 7.6: Lock Drive Links

To Clear a Lock Jam
1.

Identify which lock is jammed: hold one of the drive links at the bottom of the lock and
jiggle it upwards and downwards to test for vertical play. If the lock is free then there
should be some small movement. If the lock is jammed it will feel solidly immobile (Fig.
7.6).

2.

Repeat this test for each of the eight locks.

3.

If all are free, proceed to the next most likely cause.

4.

If a lock is found to be jammed, back off the cam stack by gripping the cams and tugging
the stack clockwise as seen looking down on the stack. The stack can only be moved a
very small amount and moving it even slightly requires some effort. Sometimes this is all
that is necessary to free the lock. This is dirty work. Gloves and protective clothing are
recommended.

5.

Check the lock for vertical play as in Step 1.

6.

If the lock is free check that each of the thirty-one figure wheels in that column are
correctly aligned under the cursor that marks the readout point immediately above each
wheel (Fig. 2.6, p. 10). Align any deranged wheel by manually turning in the direction that
increases its digit value. Do not over rotate but only advance the wheel incrementally to
the next digit in the direction of increasing value.

7.

Repeat Step 6 for any other jammed locks identified in Step 2.

8.

If a lock remains jammed it can be freed by uncoupling it from its drive link. Free the lock
by removing the shoulder screw and washer that couple the lock to the drive link at the
bottom of the lock blade (Fig. 7.6, inset).

9.

Repeat Step 6.

10. Lower the lock by hand and check that it now engages by entering between the figure
wheel teeth.
112

7 Trouble Shooting

11. Push the lock upwards by hand and let it drop under its own weight. This helps realign any
deranged figure wheels.
12. Re-fix the shoulder screw and washer.
13. Repeat Steps 8 through 11 to free any remaining jammed locks.
14. When all locks are free, gently test the crank using the recommended action for
incremental advance (see Section 3.2, p. 17).

Sector Wheel Jams (Too Slow)
A jam at 0 or 25 units is an indication of a possible sector wheel jam.
Caused by the sector wheel teeth fouling the figure wheel teeth when the sectors lower to
engage the figure wheels at the start of an addition cycle.
This jam occurs if either the sector or figure wheels are under rotated when the sectors lower.
The descending sector wheel will rest on top of the figure wheel out of engagement and the
Engine will jam.
To Clear a Sector Wheel Jam
1. Locate which sector column is jammed: pull down by hand on each sector column from the
top and feel for some give. If free there will be some small movement. If jammed it will be
immovably solid (Fig. 6.6, p. 75 to identify axes).
2. Locate the jammed sector wheel(s) in the jammed column: rotate by hand each sector
wheel in the column. The unjammed sectors have a small amount of rotational play. The
jammed sector, resting on the figure wheel below, will be immovably solid.
3. From below gently ease the
sector column upwards
using a lever bar to relieve
the load on the two jammed
parts and free the jammed
sector by rotating it while
levering gently (Fig. 7.7).
4. Release the sector column
by lowering using the lever
bar and pull down on the
column to check for some

Fig. 7.7: Testing a Sector Axis for Jam.

give.

113

7 Trouble Shooting

5. If still jammed, locate another jammed sector wheel in the same column and repeat Steps 2
through 4.
6. If free, repeat Steps 1 through 4 for the remaining seven columns.

Sector Zero Stop Jam
A jam at 0 or 25 units is an indicator of a zero stop jam.
Caused by a sector wheel or wheels under rotating and fouling the zero stop when the sector
wheels are being lifted to their fully raised position.
Once the Engine is run in and initial adjustments made, this fault is relatively rare.
To Clear a Sector Zero Stop Jam
1. Locate the jammed sector wheel: try to
rotate by hand each sector wheel in turn on
each of the columns. Unjammed sector
wheels have a small amount of rotational
play. Jammed sectors are immovably solid.
2. If a jammed sector wheel is located, pull
down on the sector column and at the same
time try to rotate the sector wheel clear of
the fouling zero stop.
3. Repeat Step 2 for any other jammed sector
wheel on the same column.
4. Repeat Step 2 and 3 for the remaining
columns.
5. If the jam cannot be cleared in this way,
remove the zero stop for the jammed
column. The zero stops are in the form of a
comb-pillar (Fig. 7.8). Exactly mark the
footprint of the zero stop pillar on the top
and bottom bearing plates before loosening

Fig. 7.8
Figure
wheels

Sector wheel
zero stop

the fixing screws. Unscrew and remove the
two fixing screws in each of the top and bottom bearing plates.

114

Sector
wheels

7 Trouble Shooting

Warning: the position of the zero stop pillar is critical. It must be exactly returned to its original
position. The fixing screws are in clearance holes so cannot be relied on to register the pillar
exactly.
6. Rotate the jammed sector wheel(s) so that when the pillar is refixed in its original position
the sector wheel and zero stop do not foul.

Inking Roller-bar Jam
Caused by the inking roller failing to retract in time to clear the paper roller-bar travelling in
the opposite direction towards the printer type-face to take an inked impression (Fig. 5.2, p.
38).
The timing clearances are tight and the inking roller can get trapped.
Occurrences are rare in normal operation but have been known to occur if the shafts and drive
linkages for the paper feed barrel and inking roller are not well lubricated. The small drag from
insufficient lubrication is sometimes sufficient to create at a lag in the timing in the retraction
of the inking roller.

To Clear an Inking Roller-bar Jam
1. The visible indicator of this jam is the paper feed barrel stuck in the raised position with the
chapter disc at just past 35 units.
2. Confirm this jam by peering from below at the printing wheels. It is dark in there so a torch
will help. If the inking roller is behind (on the printer wheel side) the roller-bar then this jam
needs to be cleared.
3. To free the roller-bar remove the link the pivot in the link in the drive train for the printing

Remove this pivot
Fig. 7.9: Printing Stroke Drive Link.

115

7 Trouble Shooting

stroke: remove the retaining pin on the Engine side and slide out the pivot (Fig. 7.9). This
frees the paper feed drum and roller-bar to drop back out of the path of the inking roller.
4. Advance the main crank a few degrees to return the inking roller to the inking bath
assembly.
5. Reconnect the drive link by replacing the pivot and pin.
6. Lubricate the drive link assembly especially the bearings on the shaft that swings the inking
roller on its downward and upwards sweep, and the shaft for the paper feed barrel.

Stereotyping Punch-wheel Jam
A jam at 35 units is an indicator of a stereotype punch-wheel jam.
Caused by under- or over-rotation of one or more punch wheels.
The crab lock is prevented from engaging fully and jams the punch wheel(s) in the displaced
position. In normal operation the punch wheels come out of mesh with the horizontal racks
during the downward stroke and remesh on the return stroke. A jammed crab lock prevents
remeshing on return.
This jam is more common with, but not limited to, the small punch wheels and occurs typically
when the crab lock tries to engage before the punch wheel has fully rotated.

To Clear a Punch-wheel Jam
Remove the jammed punch wheel set and investigate the timing delay paying particular
attention to poor lubrication and friction drag.

116

7 Trouble Shooting

7.3 Diagnostic Tests
There are a number of diagnostic checks that can be carried out to verify correct operation of
the addition and carriage mechanisms.
The checks separately test:
1. Carry warning.
2. Carry lever locking.
3. Carry lever reset.
4. Carriage of tens.
Checking Warning Action
If any carry levers are removed from the axis or new ones installed, or the axis removed from
the Engine the warning action of each of the carry levers on that axis should be checked.
The test also serves to check a suspect warning action when the machine has been in service.
Two people are required to perform this check.

Preliminary Procedure
To check carry warning operation the figure wheels must be able to be turned without
restriction. To allow unrestricted rotation the odd and even sectors wheels need to be fully
disengaged (raised) and the figure wheel locks withdrawn.
The preliminary procedure (below) unlocks the figure wheels and raises the odd and even
sector wheels out of engagement. For illustrated version of Steps 1 through 5 below see the
Section 4.3, Entering Initial Values, p. 23).
1.

Cycle the engine to the zero point (FULL CYCLE) on the chapter disc.

2.

Locate the release lever. Lift the release lever till the spring catch enters the second
detent. The arm of the cam-follower lifts clear of the drive slot in the sector bar. The
movement to raise the lever is small – only a few degrees. If there is resistance, grip and
jiggle first one, then the other of the two lifting levers to free the follower arms from the
sector bar slots.

3.

Lift one of the two lifting levers (it doesn’t matter which). The rotation in both cases is
clockwise as seen facing the Engine. The movement is small – only a few degrees.

117

7 Trouble Shooting

4.

Lock the handle in the raised position by pulling the locking plunger fully out and securing
the bayonet lock. The locking plungers must be slid fully home i.e. towards the operator.
Lifting the levers to the end of their travel can be a struggle. It is important that they are
fully lifted and locked. It sometimes helps to push down on the lever first before lifting.

5.

Repeat steps 3 and 4 for the remaining lifting lever. Odd and even sectors are now
disengaged.

6.

Advance the Engine to a 2-unit point if the column being checked is even, or to the
27-unit point if the column is odd. In this position the figure wheel locks are
disengaged and the warning axis is in the correct position to warn.

To Check Warning Action
7.

Set the carry lever of the digit position being checked
to the Unwarned position i.e. to the first detent (Fig.
7.10).

8.

The operator at the front of the Engine rotates one
figure wheel in the positive direction i.e. in the
direction to increase the digit value. Each time the

Odd

wheel passes ‘9’ through to ‘0’ the operator at the
rear confirms that the carry lever advances to the
next (second) detent i.e. from the Unwarned to
Warned position. (The ‘positive direction’ is one way
in the case of even columns and the opposite in the
case of odd).
9.

Rotate each figure wheel through four decades i.e.
through four transitions from ‘9’ to ‘0’ to check that
each of four outer nibs on the figure wheel warns

Even
Fig. 7.10: Carry levers
Unwarned.

correctly. Each time the mechanism is warned, the operator at the rear restores the
carry lever to the unwarned position (first detent) before the next transition from ‘9’
to ‘0’.
10. Check each time there is a warning that the sprung pawl is correctly seated in the
second detent.
11. If the pawl ends up on the shoulder of the detent limb either after or before the
second detent then the warning claw needs to be adjusted for over- or under-shoot.
This adjustment is done at zero (FULL CYCLE) so for the meantime note which figure
wheels do not warn correctly.
12. Repeat Steps 8 through 12 for each of the figure wheels on the column noting each
position that does not warn correctly.
13. Restore all carry levers to the Unwarned position (first detent).

118

7 Trouble Shooting

14. Check any other digit positions on any other columns following Steps 7 through 13
noting any position that does not warn correctly.
15. Advance the Engine to zero (FULL CYCLE).
16. Lower the release lever. If the follower arms do not drop into the sector bar slots, jiggle
the lifting levers and lower the release lever at the same time (See Section 4.3, Entering
Initial Values).
17. Retract the locking plungers to release the two lifting levers. Lower the two levers in any
order to re-engage the sectors. Ensure that the locking plungers are fully retracted and
held in this position by the bayonet fixing (Fig. 4.7, p. 27).
18. With the Engine at zero the warning
claws can be adjusted using the
special adjusting tool (See Section
6.4, Special Tools, Figs 6.11, 6.12, p.
102). The tool is wrapped behind
the mechanism to reach the claw
(Fig. 7.11). Position the adjusting
tool so that the end of the claw fits
in the slot at the end of the tool
(Fig. 6.12). Hold the long limb of the
carry lever in one hand to counter
the bending force (left hand in Fig.

Fig. 7.11: Warning Claw Adjustment.

7.11) and using the adjusting tool
bend the claw away from the figure wheel barrel in the event of overshoot, and closer to
the barrel in the event of undershoot. The claw is brittle and the adjustments are very
small. (The tool faces one way for Odd levers and the opposite way for Even levers). It
does not matter whether or not the steel pawl is in any of the indents (Warned,
Unwarned, or Carried). Use any position that is convenient.
19. Retest each adjusted position to confirm correct carry action following the procedure
described above. Re-adjust if necessary. The final adjustment is found by trial and error.

To Check Carry Lever Locking Action
This procedure checks the action of the horns on the carry lever to lock the figure wheels when
the warning axis is lowered during the calculation cycle.
The procedure requires two people.

119

7 Trouble Shooting

Procedure
1. Check that all carry levers are in the
Unwarned position (first detent).
2. Cycle the Engine as slowly as possible
without jamming while the second
operator positioned at the rear of the
Engine examines the locking horns on
the carry lever as it lowers onto a
figure wheel tooth to immobilise it.
The lowering action occurs at 11 units
if the column is even and 36 units if

Fig: 7.12 Odd and Even
Carry Levers.

odd (Fig. 7.12).

Locking horns

3. While the axis lowers check that the
locking horns on the carry lever mesh smoothly and do not derange the figure wheels.
If any figure wheel motion is detected check the warning action described in the
previous section.
4. Recycle the Engine as many times as necessary to check all digit positions.

To Check Carry Lever Reset
Each cycle the carry levers are returned to the unwarned position. The carry mechanism
rotates and the carry levers bear against a set of reset stops that restore the carry lever
to the first detent i.e. the unwarned position. The action to restore carry levers to the
unwarned position finishes at 20 units for odd differences and 45 units for even
differences (Fig. 6.6, p. 75 for layout).
This check can be carried out whatever numbers there are on the figure wheels at the
start i.e. the Engine does not need to be first zeroised.

Procedure
1.

For even columns crank to slightly past 25 units (HALF CYCLE)

2.

By hand set all the carry levers on the even column being checked to the ‘carried’
position i.e. the third detent.

3.

Check each digit position to confirm that carry levers do not foul the stops and that
there is a small clearance between the lever and the stop.

4.

Crank the Engine to zero (FULL CYCLE).

120

7 Trouble Shooting

5.

Check that all the carry levers are in the unwarned position i.e. first detent.

6.

If a run of levers not returned fully to the first detent then the reset stops may need
to be adjusted. If all levers are not reset then the whole reset rack needs adjusting
with the direction of adjustment depending on whether the lever over- or underruns the first detent. There is very little adjustment using clearance margins for the
fixing screws of the stop rack support pillar but this should be tried in the first
instance. Undershooting the detents can often be corrected by packing out the reset
rack with shims mounted between the rack and the support pillar. There are three
fixing screws (Fig. 4.11, p. 32) that secure the rack to the support pillar. If these are
slackened off shims can be inserted to stand the reset rack off from the pillar.
Depending on where in the column the levers are not resetting the top or bottom of
the reset rack can be shimmed to stand off more or less.

7.

Repeat Steps 1 through 6 for each of the even difference columns and the results
column. (All evens columns can be checked in one operation by setting all carry
levers on the four evens columns to the ‘carried’ position (third detent)’ in Step 2).

8.

For odd difference columns start with the Engine slightly past zero (FULL CYCLE).

9.

Repeat Steps 2 and 3 for the column being checked.

10. Crank the Engine to 25 units (HALF CYCLE).
11. Repeat Steps 5 and 6 the column being checked.
12. Repeat Steps 8 through 11 for each of the odd difference columns. (All odd
columns can be checked in one operation by setting all carry levers on the four odd
columns to the ‘carried’ position (third detent)’ in Step 2).
13. Return the Engine to zero (FULL CYCLE).

To Check Carry Action
1.

Zeroise the Engine using the Setting Initial Values procedure (Section 4.3, Entering
Setting Initial Values, p. 23) by setting all initial values to zero i.e. set all figure
wheels (odd and even axes) to ‘0’.

2.

Cycle the Engine to just past zero (FULL CYCLE).

3.

By hand set all the carry levers on even columns to the warned position (second
detent) i.e. the three even difference columns and results column.

4.

Run one cycle and return to Zero (FULL CYCLE).

5.

Check that the top 30 even column figure wheels have value ‘1’ and the bottom
wheel has ‘0’.

6.

Check that all even carry levers are reset to the unwarned position i.e. first detent.

7.

If any of the figure wheels has not carried correctly, use the diagnostic checks given
above.

8.

Cycle the Engine to just past 25 units.

121

7 Trouble Shooting

9.

By hand set all the carry levers on the four odd difference columns to the warned
position (second detent).

10. Cycle the Engine to 25 units (HALF CYCLE).
11. Check that the top 30 odd figure wheels are at ‘1’ and the lowermost figure is ‘0’.
12. Check that all odd carry levers are reset to the unwarned position i.e. first detent.
13. If any of the figure wheels has not carried correctly, use the diagnostic checks given
above.
14. Return the Engine to Zero (FULL CYCLE).

System Checks
The combined operations of warning, locking, carriage, and reset can be exercised and
checked using the following two system checks.
The first test exercises addition and the carriage of tens, the second check tests the handling
of secondary carries i.e. carries that result from carries during addition (also known as ‘ripple’
carry or ‘domino’ carry).
Columns are checked one at a time and the procedure needs to be repeated for each of seven
columns.

Addition and Carry System Check
The following procedure tests the carriage of tens in a single full column. The test adds
all 9’s on one axis to 111. . . . . .19 on the next lower difference axis immediately
alongside. This generates a tens carry in each digit position.
The procedure described tests an even difference column, in this case, the 6th difference
column.
To test the whole machine the test will need to be performed seven times, once for each
of the active columns. The test takes the figure wheels a full rotation i.e. all four warning
nibs are exercised in each digit position.

122

7 Trouble Shooting

Procedure
1.

Follow the procedure for setting initial values (Section 4.3, p. 23) but at Step 11 (SET
ODD) enter all 9’s in the 7th difference column, and set the 5th, 3rd, and 1st difference
columns to all zeroes.

2.

At Step 22 (SET EVEN) set the units digit (lowermost wheel) of the 6th difference
column to ‘9’ and the remaining thirty wheels to ‘1’.

3.

Complete all thirty five steps of the Entering Initial Values procedure. The Engine is
now at zero (FULL CYCLE).

4.

Cycle the Engine through four complete cycles.

5.

Check that the 6th difference column has a ‘5’ in the units position (lowermost figure
wheel) and ‘1’s in all remaining thirty positions.

6.

If there is any deviation from this result repeat Steps 1, 2, and 3 above but at Step 4,
take the Engine through only one cycle.

7.

Check that the units digit of the 6th difference column is ‘8’ and all other wheels
register ‘1’s.

8.

If the results are correct complete one more cycle.

9.

Check that the units value of the 6th difference column is ‘7’ and that there are ‘1’s in
all other positions.

10. If the result is as required complete one more cycle.
11. Check that the units value of the 6th difference column is ‘6’ and that there are ‘1’s in
all other positions.
12. If the results are correct complete one more cycle.
13. Check that the units value of the 6th difference column ‘5’ and that there are ‘1’s in
all other positions.
14. If the results are correct then the test is successful.
15. If there is any deviation from this result then the four separate diagnostic checks
checks (Section 7.3, Diagnostic Tests, p. 117) should be carried out on the 6th
difference column.
The procedure described tests an even difference column, the 6th difference column. To
test the remaining odd or even columns repeat the test setting the column being tested
to all ‘1’s with a ‘9’ in the units place, and the previous (higher value difference column)
to all ‘9’s.

123

7 Trouble Shooting

Secondary-Carry Propagation Test
The following test checks the propagation of carries that result from carries. The test adds
999. . . . . .99 to 000. . . . .09 on the next lower difference axis immediately alongside.
The test takes the figure wheels a full rotation i.e. all four warning nibs are exercised in
each digit position.
The procedure described tests an even difference column, in this case the 6th difference
column. To test the whole machine the test will need to be performed seven times, once
for each of the active columns.
1.

Follow the procedure for setting initial values (Section 4.3, p. 23) but at Step 11 (SET
ODD) enter all 9’s in the 7th difference column, and set the 5th, 3rd, and 1st difference
columns to all zeroes.

2.

At Step 22 (SET EVEN) set the units digit (lowermost wheel) of the 6th difference
column to ‘9’ and the remaining thirty wheels to ‘0’.

3.

Complete all thirty five steps of the setting initial value procedure. The Engine is now
at zero (FULL CYCLE).

4.

Take the Engine through one complete cycle.

5.

Check that the 6th difference column has an ‘8’ in the units position (lowermost
figure wheel) and ‘0’s in all remaining thirty positions.

6.

If the result is correct complete one more full cycle.

7.

Check that the units value of the 6th difference column is ‘7’ and that there are ‘0’s in
all other positions.

8.

If the result is as required complete one more full cycle.

9.

Check that the units value of the 6th difference column is ‘6’ and that there are ‘0’s in
all other positions.

10. If the result is correct complete one more full cycle.
11. Check that the units value of the 6th difference column is ‘5’ and that there are ‘0’s in
all other positions.
12. If the result is correct then the test is successful.
13. If there is any deviation from this result then carry out the four separate checks
(Section 7.3, Diagnostic Tests, p. 117) to check the 6th difference column.

The procedure described tests an even difference column. To test the remaining odd or
even columns repeat the test setting the column being tested to all ‘0’s with a ‘9’ in the
units digit, and the previous (higher value difference column) to all ‘9’s.

124

7 Trouble Shooting

Use of State Table
When diagnosing calculation errors it is useful to record the internal state of the Engine
at a particular point in the investigation.
A blank ‘State Table’ is provided in Appendix 10.3, p. 143 to record the position, settings
or values of the figure wheels, sector wheels, result column, carry axis, manual and
automatic locks for all columns and all digit positions.

Replacing Parts
Badly damaged or fractured parts will need to be replaced. The procedures for replacing
parts on an axis are described in Section 6 (Maintenance and Repair, p. 70).

Trouble Shooting the Output Apparatus
The drive to the output apparatus can be uncoupled so that the printer and stereotyping
apparatus and the calculating section can be run separately and independently.
With the output apparatus uncoupled from the main drive the apparatus can be run using
the auxiliary crank which provides a local drive close to the output apparatus. This makes
fault-finding, adjustment and repair easier.
The uncoupling clutch is in the main drive shaft that runs the length of the underside of
the Engine (Fig. 5.6, p. 41). It is operated using two lever handles, the clutch lever (at the
front of the Engine) and the locking lever (at the rear of the Engine) (Figs 5.38, 5.39, 5.40,
pp. 64, 65).
There is an interlock arrangement that locks the Engine if the output apparatus is being
run and locks the output apparatus if the Engine is being run. The drive can be uncoupled
and recoupled only at specific points in the timing cycle and the interlock mechanism
ensures that the drive can only be recoupled when the Engine and the output apparatus
are correctly phased.

125

7 Trouble Shooting

Because the clutch can only be disengaged and re-engaged at two specific points in the
timing cycle it cannot be used as a general debugging aid in the event of a jam unless the
jam happens to occur at the two specific points in the cycle.
The detailed procedures for uncoupling and coupling the drives is described in Section
5.4, Uncoupling the Drive, p. 64.

Results Transmission-Train Test
Results are transferred from the results column to the printing and stereotyping
apparatus via a train consisting of sectors, racks, spindles, vertical racks, printing wheels,
horizontal racks and punch wheels. The train cannot normally be broken for fault finding.
However, there is a test that allows each digit transmission path to be tested. For
procedure, see Section 6.2, Maintenance and Repair, p. 97, also Section 6.4, Special Tools,
p. 104.
.

126

8 Moving the Engine

8.

Moving the Engine

8.1 Overview
There are two main scenarios in which the Engine might be moved:
1.

Moving to a new location in the same building

2.

Freighting by rail, road or air.

The Engine weighs some 5 tonnes and the mechanisms are precisely adjusted.
The procedures described are designed to protect the Engine during transit against
derangement, distortion, or damage to ordinarily unsecured parts.
The Engine is cross-braced against strain using tie rods and ordinarily unsecured parts,
including hanging weights, are wrapped, boxed and strapped to the frame.
Road, rail and air transport invariably involve sustained vibration and can involve temperature
variations especially if air freighted.
Freighting by road, rail or air requires measures in addition to those described for moving to a
new location in the same building.
These include measures to prevent loosening of fixings from vibration, damage resulting from
shock movement, and corrosion.

Moving to a new location in the same building
Moving the Engine typically involves the following separate operations:
1.

Removing the wooden plinth.

2.

Bracing the frame using tie rods.

3.

Securing and protecting all normally unsecured parts.

4.

Jacking up the steel base.

5.

Inserting skates or rollers.

6.

Positioning spreader boards.

7.

Rolling the Engine to new location.

127

8 Moving the Engine

8.

Removing skates or rollers.

9.

Removing the bracing.

10. Unstrapping and unpacking normally unsecured parts.
11. Refitting removed parts.
12. Levelling.
13. Checking.
The wooden plinth needs to be removed to expose the box-section steel base and give access
to the fixings for the tie rods that brace the frame.
There are two different wooden plinths. There are polished solid mahogany plinths for both US
and UK Engines, and a provisional hard-wearing sheet-material plinth for the US Engine used
for frequent demonstration over a long period. The fixing arrangements for the two plinths
are not the same. There is stowage space inside the mahogany plinths for the tie rods and
bracing fixings.

. . . . . . 8.2 Bracing the Engine

128

8 Moving the Engine

8.2 Bracing the Engine
1. Remove the plinth
US Engine. Remove the provisional plinth. The top sheet of the platform is in two halves.
Remove both halves by unscrewing the fixing screws located under the overlapping lip.
There are eight screws per half, sixteen in total (Figs 8.1, 8.2). Lift out the two end boards
and remove all four kickboards (Figs 8.3, 8.4).

Fig. 8.1

Fig. 8.2

Fig. 8.3

Fig. 8.4

UK and US Engine. Remove the polished mahogany plinth. The plinth is constructed in two
halves i.e. it is split along its length and there are matching lift-out filling pieces at each of
the short ends. The kickboards are integral with the top so do not attempt to remove any of
the brass screws in the top sheet that forms the platform for standing on. First remove the
two end section filling pieces by lifting them out (they are not fixed) (Fig. 8.5 left). Unscrew
the eight brass woodscrew fixing screws at each end (Fig. 8.5 right). There is provision
inside the plinth down the long sides for stowing the tie rods and bracing fixings.

129

8 Moving the Engine

Fig. 8.5: Mahogany plinth.

Fixing screws
Lift-out end section

Then remove the brass fixing screws down the long side of the kickboards (four each side). This
frees the two long sections of the plinth. Do not attempt to dismantle the kickboards from the
platform surface.
2.

Locate and identify the following fixings (Fig. 8.6)
(a) 8-off tie rods (four each of two lengths) (not shown)
(b) 6-off pivot blocks with pins
(c) 4-off square-headed fixing screws to secure steadies to frame 2-off steadies
(unequal lengths)
(d) 24-off Allen screws for pivot blocks
(e) 8-off Allen screws for fixing tie rods to steadies

Steadies
Fig. 8.6: Pivot
blocks and fixing
screws.

130

8 Moving the Engine

Fig. 8.8: Short steady

Fig. 8.7: Fixing holes.

Fig. 8.9: Long steady.

3.

Fix the two top steadies to the top of the two end framing pieces using the four squareheaded fixing screws. The shorter framing piece fixes at the output apparatus end; the
longer framing piece fixes at the main crank end (Figs 8.7, 8.8, 8.9).

4.

On the base locate the groups of four fixing
holes for each of the six pivot blocks (Fig. 8.10).

5.

Starting with the pivot block close to the lower
framing rail at the main crank fix one half of the
pivot block to the base using two Allen screws
and insert the pivot pin (Fig. 8.11).

6.

Loosely fix one end of a long tie rod to the
steady using an Allen screw (Fig 8.12).

Fig. 8.11

Fig. 8.12

131

Fig. 8.10: Fixing holes.

8 Moving the Engine

Note – Orientation of Tie Rods
The tie rods have a left-handed thread at one end and a right-handed thread at the other end.
When the rods are braced to stabilise the frame they are in tension. The tie rods are tightened
by turning them. Install the rods so that they have the same orientation. That way they will all
tighten with the same direction of turning.
7.

Slide the other end of the tie rod onto the pivot block pin, fit the
mating half of the pivot block and fix with two Allen screws (Fig. 8.13).
Tighten all Allen screws.

8.

Locate the pivot block that is permanently fixed to the base and
supporting the leg of the output apparatus (Figs. 8.14).

9.

Fix the end of a long tie rod to the threaded lug captive in the pivot

Fig. 8.13

block.
10. Secure the other end to the stay at the crank end using the
Allen screw.
11. Repeat Steps 6 through 10 to fix the two remaining long
stays working from the rear of the Engine.
12. Tension the four tie rods by rotating. Work progressively
around the Engine tensioning each rod in stages
13. Fix half the pivot block and pin for the base of one of the
short tie rods (Fig. 8.15).
14. Loosely fix the upper end to the outside of the steady using
the Allen screw (Fig. 8.16)
15. Slide the lower end of the tie rod over the pivot pin and fix
the mating half of the pivot block (Fig. 8.17a).
16. Tighten the Allen screws where the tie rod is anchored on
the stay.
Fig. 8.17a

Fig. 8.15

Fig. 8.16

132

Fig. 14

8 Moving the Engine

17. Repeat Steps 13 through 16 for the
remaining three short ties. Tension the four
tie rods by rotating working progressively
from one to the next.
18. The Engine is now braced (Fig. 8.17b).

8.3 Securing Loose Parts
Falling weights and suspended counter-weights need
to be secured in transport boxes.
Procedures
1.

Wrap the four sets of vertical rack counterweights in soft material and stow in the transport
boxes leaving the cords on the pulleys (Figs. 8.18,

Fig. 8.17b

8.19).
2.

Cushion the surfaces where the transport boxes bear on the Engine.

3.

Relieve the weight of the upper two clusters of weights with a sling over the top of the frame
(Fig. 8.20). Relieve the weight of the lower two clusters by resting them on the support chocks.

4.

Truss and strap the boxes and chocks to the frame (Fig. 8.20).

Fig. 8.18
Fig. 8.19

Fig. 8.20

133

8 Moving the Engine

5.

Unhitch the cords from the pulleys for the travelling platform falling weights. Wrap the
weights and place them in the transport boxes. Leave the cords loose and strap the transport
boxes to the frame cushioning the contact surfaces with foam padding (Fig. 8.21).

Fig. 8.21: Foam packing for
travelling platform falling weights
transit boxes.

6.

Fig. 8.22: Scoop cam
counter-balance
weight transit box.

Repeat Step 3 for the hanging weight that biases the scoop cam clutch at the main drive (Fig.
8.22).

7.

Raise the end-of-page trip weight in the trip cradle under the stereotype
apparatus. Wrap and strap the cradle and weight to the bar above (Fig.
8.23).

8.

Remove the main crank handle by removing the single fixing screw Figs
8.24, 8.25). Remove the auxiliary crank at the output apparatus in the
same way (Fig 8.26).

Fig. 8.23

Fig. 8.24. Single
fixing screw.

Fig. 8.26. Auxiliary crank
handle removed.

Fig 8.25. Main crank.

134

8 Moving the Engine

8.4 Jacking up and Moving
Procedures
1. Raise the base by screwing down the six jacking screws to lift the Engine clear of the floor.
Turn each bolt in sequence only a couple of turns at a time to avoid stressing the base (Fig.
8.27). Toe jacks can now be used to raise the base sufficiently to slide skates, rollers or
rolling chassis jacks under the base (Fig 8.28, 8.29).
Fig. 8.28: Toe jack.

Fig. 8.29: Skate.

Fig. 8.27: Jacking
screws.

2. Lay spreader boards
along the route to
distribute the load and
protect the floor (Fig.
8.30).
3. In the new location jack
up the base, chock up if
necessary, remove the
skates or rollers, place
spreader plates under
the six jacking screws
and lower the Engine
base.

Fig. 8.30: Skates and chassis jacks.

4. Level the base using
the jacking screws taking care to turn each screw in turn a few turns at a time to avoid
twist-stressing the base.
5. Reverse the bracing and part-securing procedures described to restore the Engine to an
operational state.
6. If appropriate stow the tie rods and bracing fixings inside the plinth before reassembling.
7. Check machine screws for tightness with special attention to top and bottom framing plates
holding the vertical axes, and framing screw fixings.

135

8 Moving the Engine

Note
The UK Engine has four removable outriggers that fit at each corner of the steel base and which are
fixed using the jacking screws. The outriggers reduce the head-height in transit so that the Engine
can fit into the Science Museum’s goods lift where there is a critical headroom restriction. The
outriggers can be used on the US Engine. The fixings are identical.

Additional Preparation for Freighting by Road, Rail or Air
The Engine weighs some 5 tonnes. While the frame and base are robust, many parts are delicate.
Moving the Engine between sites
is a specialised task. The Engine
will need to be crated securely for
physical protection and possibly
wrapped for specific
environmental control.
A custom-made steel container
was used for transatlantic

Fig. 8.31: Custom container.

Fig. 8.32: Partially dismantled.

freighting by air (Figs 8.31, 8.32).

8.5 Additional Precautions
There are specific additional hazards when freighting by road, rail or air:
1. Vibration – fixings shaking loose.
2. Corrosion - especially from extreme temperature variation.
3. Shocks, especially sudden downward motion.

Vibration
The risks of fixings shaking loose include disturbing precise adjustments, parts detaching and
fouling the mechanism, loosening of framing pieces especially those not specifically braced by
the tie rods.

136

8 Moving the Engine

The risk of consequential damage from sustained vibration should not be underestimated.
1. Check and tighten all fixing screws on the top and bottom plates of the vertical axes.
2. Check and tighten all fixing screws securing the framing pieces.
3. Remove the two bronze stereotype trays from the travelling platforms and remove the
knurled fixing screws from the frames.
Ideally a reversible thread-locking compound should be used to secure machine screws
especially the fixing screws for the top and bottom bearing plates, carry reset stop pillars, and
sector zero stop pillars.
In addition consideration should be given to pinning or dowelling the top and bottom bearing
plates.

Corrosion
The steel components are especially vulnerable to corrosion. Corrosion can be radically
accelerated in extreme low temperatures and by severe temperature variations. Bronzes are
more resistant but polished surfaces discolour to dull matt and sometimes mottle. The effects
occur rapidly if the conditions are extreme.
The environmental conditions in the hold of an aircraft without environmental control are
extreme and damage from corrosion can occur with short exposure.
Swaddling the Engine in plastic is not recommended: condensation gets trapped.
Protective sprays are one solution. Deposits from protective sprays will need to be removed
before operating the Engine. The mechanisms are intricate and access makes them difficult to
clean.
Ideally the Engine should be transported in a temperature and humidity controlled
environment especially if freighted by air.
If environmental control is not possible, specialist advice should be sought as to how best to
protect the metals for the particular circumstances involved. Duration of the trip, humidity and
temperature extremes will favour different protective treatments.

137

8 Moving the Engine

Shock Movement
The Engine is vulnerable to shock movement. Lifting by crane or winch risks jolts and sudden
dropping motion.

Disregard all reassurances by transport companies that the consignment will not be dropped.
There is typically a long chain of different freight handlers in a major move and the likelihood
of the chain of responsibility and care remaining unbroken is close to nil.
Precautions to secure parts vulnerable to displacement should be made on the assumption
that the Engine will be shocked in transit.
The stereotype travelling platform requires special attention. It is heavy and rests on V-shaped
sliders. It is secure if the Engine is moved on skates over a smooth floor or into goods lifts. If
moving the Engine involves lifting by crane or winch or any method that entails risk of sudden
movement then the stereotyping travelling platform should be secured.
Sudden downward movement or jolting can levitate the platform from the V-sliders and
damage the sliders and the drive gears when it crashes down. Sharp lateral movement can
stress the drive train.

Additional Precautions against Shock
1. Securely strap the hanging-weight transit boxes to the frame.
2. Securely strap the stereotype travelling platform to the frame to secure it against vertical
displacement if dropped, and sliding in the event of sudden lateral motion.

138

9 Specification

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2
Specification
Size:

Height:
Length:
Width:

7 feet
12 feet 7 inches
4 feet 6 inches (Output Apparatus)

Weight:

Calc. section inc. base:
Output apparatus:
Total:

2.6 tonnes (measured)
2.5 tonnes (estimated)
5.1 tonnes

No. Parts:

Calculating section:
Output apparatus:
Total:

4,000
4,000
8,000

Materials:

Mechanisms:
Plinth:
Crank handle sleeves:

Bronze (PB2), cast iron, steel
Mahogany
Lignum Vitae

Lubricants:

Oil:
Shafts, links, spindles, bearings

Light spindle oil:
‘Hydroslide HG220’ by D. A Stuart Oils Ltd
‘Foodlube Hi-Power 22’ by Rocol
‘Varmulti 220’ by Varol Lubricants

Slideways , rack-housings

‘Crown Multilube 68’ by D.A. Stuart Oils
‘Crown Multilube 150’ by D. A. Stuart Oils
‘Foodlube Universal Grease’ by Rocol
Castrol LM

Grease:
Drive gears
Cams and sliding cam followers
Graphite powder:
Stereotype horizontal racks
Printer vertical racks
Print and punch wheels
Ink:

Non-toxic water-based printing ink

Speed:

8 seconds per machine cycle (seven 31-digit additions)

Precision:

Calculation:
31 digits
Printing & Stereotyping: 30 digits

Logic:

Decimal digital
Positive Numbers:
Negative Numbers:

Capacity:

Calculates and tabulates any 7 -order polynomial to 31 decimal places
Prints inked copy results to 30 decimal places on paper print roll.
Stereotypes results to thirty digits in two font sizes.

Standard decimal
Complements
th

139

Timing Diagram

140

Appendix 10.1 Timing Diagram

140

Appendix 10.2 Setting up Check List

10.2 Setting-up Check List
The setting-up checklist on the next page is a short-form list of the sequence of steps in the
procedure for entering initial values when setting up a calculation.
The sequence is exact and should not be deviated from.
The list is intended for use by an operator setting up a calculation as an aid to ensuring that no
steps are omitted and as a record of the completion of the correct procedure.
The list is a short-form version of the steps described in more detail in Section 4.3, Entering
Initial Values, p. 23 where more explanation is provided. The numbering of the steps in the list
corresponds to the numbered descriptions in Section 4.3.

141

Date:

Setter:

Checker:

Rev. UM10

Babbage Engine Calculation Setup Checklist
This checklist should be completed each time the setup procedure is carried out on the Engine. All steps
should be checked off by the checker as the step is performed. Do not change or omit steps under any
circumstances. Doing so could result in physical damage to the Engine. Refer to Section 4, p. 26 for
fuller description of each step.
Step

Check

Description

1

Cycle the Engine to the zero (Full Cycle) point

2,3

Lift the release lever to disengage the sector drive (jiggle lifting levers if necessary)

4

Raise one of the lifting levers

5

Lock in raised position

6

Raise and lock the second lifting lever

7

Advance the Engine to the 10-unit point

8,9

Engage the four manual locks on the odd difference columns

10,11

Check all four odd setting locks are engaged and secured, all even locks NOT engaged

12

Advance the Engine to the 20-unit (Set Odd) point

13

Disengage the manual lock on the 7th difference column

14

Decide where the index counter will be set up

15

Enter the 7th difference value on the figure wheels

16

Re-engage the manual lock on 7 difference column

17

Repeat steps 13, 15, 16 for remaining three odd difference columns remembering the index

18

Advance the Engine to the 35-unit point

19

Engage the four manual even setting locks

20

Disengage the four manual odd setting locks and secure in the disengaged position

21,22

Check all four even setting locks are secured engaged, all odd locks NOT engaged

23

Advance the Engine to the 45-unit (Set Even) point

24

Disengage the manual lock on the 6th difference column

25

Enter the 6th difference value on the figure wheels

26

Re-engage the manual lock on 6 difference column

27

Repeat steps 24 to 26 for the other two even difference columns

28
29,30

Repeat steps 20 to 22 for the results column. Ensure the lowest wheel is all the way to the
h
Advance the Engine to the zero point. Check that lowest result carry lever is still unwarned

31

Retract the locking plungers and lower the lifting levers

32,33

Lower the release lever to reengage the sector drive. Then lower the two lifting levers

34

Disengage the four manual locks on the even columns. Secure in disengaged position

35

CAREFULLY CHECK ALL EIGHT MANUAL LOCKS ARE FULLY DISENGAGED

36

If required, rewind the stereotype trays

th

th

142

Appendix 10.3 State of Engine Table

10.3 State Record
The State Record table is intended as a diagnostic aid.
Its purpose is to provide a template in which to record and capture the state of the
Engine at a particular point so that the progression of a fault or calculation error can be
tracked, or to record a deviation from normal working and relevant diagnosis.
It is designed for use by an operator or maintenance engineer encountering a fault,
malfunction or calculation error.

Key
S(n)

Sector axis (n).

S0

Sector column that transfers digit values from results column to the output
apparatus

R

Result column

C(n)

Carry column (n). C0 is the result carry column

D(n)

Difference column (n)

143

"
!

Appendix 10.3 Babbage Engine State Record

(
)
*

144

144
&&

#

(
)
*

$

%&
%&
'
&

(
)
*

145

145

Appendix 10.4 Stereotype Layout Options

11 Acknowledgements

11. Acknowledgements
The material in this User Manual is indebted to several knowledgeable and generous people.
To Sir Neil Cossons and Dame Margaret Weston, former Directors of the Science Museum, for
taking a risk in backing the construction project.
To Nathan Myhrvold who funded the construction of the output apparatus for the London
Engine, and funded the construction of a complete second Engine, for his patience,
encouragement, interest and support.
To the late Reg Crick for the meticulous preparation of manufacturing drawings and the
expertise, inventiveness and professionalism that informed the countless engineering design
decisions on which the physical realisation of the Engine is based. For his limitless patience and
methodical attention to detail. And for his generosity in sharing his knowledge so openly.
To Richard Horton for taking the lead role in the construction of the whole of the second (USA)
Engine and for assisting in the construction of the output apparatus for the London Engine. For
the perfectionism and skill in all he does, his unfailing helpfulness, and his commitment to the
project.
To the late Barrie Holloway who with Reg Crick specified and built the calculating section of
London Engine.
To Chris Ward who with Richard Horton built the second machine. For his skill, wisdom and
cheerfulness.
To Tim Robinson for his avid interest in the Engine, for his remarkable efforts supporting,
maintaining, repairing and exhibiting the second Engine, and for his generosity in sharing his
expertise so selflessly.

146

12 Picture Credits

12. Picture Credits
The Science Museum holds exclusive rights to all illustrations, tables and diagrams with the
following exceptions:
Figs. 6.1, 8.1 through to 8.4, 8.6 through 8.32 inclusive, lists p. 142, 144 by kind permission of
Tim Robinson.
Cover (elevation of Difference Engine 2), Figs. 5.19, 5.20 p. 48 Doron Swade.

147

