Redeeming Charles Babbage’s
Mechanical Computer
A successful e›ort to build a working, three-ton
Babbage calculating engine suggests that history
has misjudged the pioneer of automatic computing
by Doron D. Swade

C

harles Babbage is celebrated as
the great ancestral ﬁgure in the
history of computing. The designs for his vast mechanical calculators
rank among the most startling intellectual achievements of the 19th century.
Yet Babbage failed in his e›orts to realize those plans in physical form. Histories of computing routinely assert that
Babbage faltered primarily because the
demands of his devices lay beyond the
capabilities of Victorian mechanical engineering. Curiously, no contemporary
evidence supports that view.
In 1985 my colleagues and I at the Science Museum in London set out to resolve or at least illuminate the question
by building a full-size Babbage computing engine based on his original designs. Our endeavor ﬁnally bore fruit in
November 1991, a month before the bicentenary of Babbage’s birth. At that
time, the device—known as Di›erence
Engine No. 2—ﬂawlessly performed its
ﬁrst major calculation. The success of
our undertaking a¤rmed that Babbage’s
failures were ones of practical accomplishment, not of design.
Those failures have become inextricably associated with his creative ge-

DORON D. SWADE is both an electronics engineer and a historian of computing. He has been senior curator of the
computing and control section of the Science Museum in London since 1985 and
has published articles on curatorship
and on the history of computing. He has
recently written two books: Charles Babbage and His Calculating Engines, which
accompanies the Babbage exhibition that
Swade curated, and, in collaboration with
Jon Palfreman, The Dream Machine: Exploring the Computer Age, a companion
to the television series of the same name.
Swade led the project to construct a fullscale Babbage calculating engine.

86

CHARLES BABBAGE sat for this daguerreotype around 1847, the year he began
work on Di›erence Engine No. 2.

nius. Babbage, proud and principled,
was famed for the vigor and sarcasm
of his public denunciations of the scientiﬁc establishment. The demise of his
engine project added a sense of injustice, bitterness and even despair to his
celebrated diatribes. Since then, he has
acquired an image of testiness and eccentricity; the ﬁrst biography of Babbage, written by Maboth Moseley and
published in 1964, was titled Irascible
Genius: A Life of Charles Babbage, Inventor. Our work at the Science Museum
emphasizes a distinctly di›erent side
of Babbage: a meticulous inventor whose
designs were hugely ambitious but well
within the realm of possibility.
Babbage’s desire to mechanize calculation arose from the exasperation he
felt at the inaccuracies in printed mathematical tables. Scientists, bankers, actuaries, navigators, engineers and the
like relied on such tables to perform
calculations requiring accuracy to more

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

than a few ﬁgures. But the production
of tables was tedious and prone to error at each stage of preparation, from
calculation to transcription to typesetting. Dionysius Lardner, a well-known
popularizer of science, wrote in 1834
that a random selection of 40 volumes
of mathematical tables incorporated
3,700 acknowledged errata, some of
which themselves contained errors.
Babbage was both a connoisseur of
tables and a fastidious analyst of tabular errors. He traced clusters of errors
common to di›erent editions of tables
and deduced where pieces of loose type
had been incorrectly replaced after falling out. On one occasion, he collaborated with John Herschel, the renowned
British astronomer, to check two independently prepared sets of calculations
for astronomical tables; the two men
were dismayed by the numerous discrepancies. “I wish to God these calculations had been executed by steam! ”
Babbage exclaimed in 1821.
Mechanical computers should, Babbage thought, o›er a means to eliminate
at a stroke all the sources of mistakes in
mathematical tables. He envisioned a
machine that not only would calculate
ﬂawlessly but would eradicate transcription and typesetting errors by automatically impressing the results of its cal^
culations onto papier-maché
strips or
plates of soft metal. A printed record
could then be generated directly from
those plates, thereby eliminating every
opportunity for the genesis of errors.
In 1822 Babbage built an experimental model intended to carry him toward
his goal. He called his mechanical calculator a “di›erence engine” because it
is based on a mathematical principle
known as the method of ﬁnite di›erences. The method permits one to determine successive values of polynomial functions using only addition [see
box on page 90 ]. Multiplication and di-

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

vision, which are far more di¤cult to
mechanize, are not necessary. Because
the value of the function at each step is
calculated based on its predecessor, a
correct ﬁnal result imparts a high degree of conﬁdence that all previous values are also correct.
For economy of design, Babbage’s difference engines use the decimal number
system rather than the binary system
common to modern electronic computers. Each digit in a multidigit number is
represented by a toothed gear wheel,
or ﬁgure wheel, engraved with decimal
numerals. The value of each digit is represented by the angular rotation of the
associated ﬁgure wheel. The engine’s
control mechanism ensures that only
whole-number values, represented by
discrete positions of the ﬁgure wheels,
are valid. Babbage boasted that his machines would produce the correct result
or would jam but that they would never
deceive.
Babbage’s most ambitious venture to
construct a full-scale calculating device

was devoted to the ill-fated Di›erence
Engine No. 1. His e›orts foundered in
1833 after a decade of design, development and component manufacture,
not to mention vast expense. The project collapsed after a dispute between
Babbage and his chief engineer, Joseph
Clement, over payment for relocating
the machining works. Outwardly at
least, technology did not feature in the
disagreement. The question that has remained tantalizingly unresolved is
whether the circumstances surrounding
the collapse of the project concealed
the technical or logical impossibility of
Babbage’s schemes.

D

i›erence Engine No. 1 consists
of a basic adding element, repeated many times over in an
arrangement that embodies the method of di›erences. The size and complexity of the engine are monumental:
the design calls for roughly 25,000 parts;
the assembled machine would measure
eight feet high, seven feet long and three

DIFFERENCE ENGINE NO. 2 was constructed in public view at
the Science Museum in London. Here the two engineers who
built it, Barrie Holloway (left ) and Reg Crick (right ), perform

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

feet deep; and it would weigh several
tons. The project, which was funded by
the British government, was also enormously expensive. When Clement’s last
bill was paid in 1834, the cost totaled
£17,470. For comparison, the steam locomotive John Bull , built in 1831, cost
all of £784.
Clement completed about 12,000 of
the 25,000 parts required for Di›erence Engine No. 1, most of which were
later melted down as scrap. The British
government ﬁnally withdrew from the
project in 1842, partly on the advice of
George Biddell Airy, Astronomer Royal, who pronounced Babbage’s engine
“worthless.” The failure to complete the
di›erence engine was the central trauma in Babbage’s scientiﬁc life; it is a topic he returns to repeatedly in his writings as though unable to reconcile himself to the dismal outcome.
The years of work on Di›erence Engine No. 1 did produce one noteworthy,
tangible result. In 1832 Clement assembled a small section of the engine, con-

some essential adjustments. Babbage also designed a printing mechanism for the di›erence engine, but because of limited time and money, the printer has not yet been built.

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

87

sisting of about 2,000 parts, as a demonstration piece. This ﬁnished part of the
unﬁnished engine is one of the ﬁnest examples of precision engineering of the
time and works impeccably to this day.
The demonstration piece is the ﬁrst
known automatic calculator. Unlike the
desktop calculators of the time, the engine, once set up, did not rely on informed human intervention. Thus, an
operator could achieve accurate results
without any understanding of the logical or mechanical principles involved.
The opportunity to speculate about machine intelligence was not lost on Babbage and his contemporaries. Harry Wilmot Buxton, a younger colleague with
whom Babbage entrusted many of his
papers, wrote that “the wondrous pulp
and ﬁbre of the brain had been substituted by brass and iron; he [ Babbage]
had taught wheelwork to think.”

Despite its impressive capabilities, the
di›erence engine could perform only
one ﬁxed task. Babbage’s reputation
as a computer pioneer largely rests on
another, more sophisticated device—
the Analytical Engine, conceived by
1834. He intended the Analytical Engine as a general-purpose programmable computing machine, whose features
are startlingly similar to those of modern electronic computers. It had a basic
repertoire of operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division)
that it could execute in any sequence.
The internal architecture of the machine
featured a separate “store” and “mill,”
equivalent to the memory and processor in a modern computer. The separation of store and mill has been a dominant design feature of electronic computers since the mid-1940s.
The Analytical Engine could be pro-

grammed by using punched cards, a
technique previously used in the Jacquard loom to control patterns of woven
thread. The Analytical Engine could take
alternative courses of action depending
on the result of a calculation, enabling
it to perform complex functions. Babbage intended the machine to be able
to handle up to 50-digit input numbers
and 100-digit results; the output could
be printed, punched or plotted.
Although historians customarily refer to the Analytical Engine as if it were
a physical thing, it is actually a series
of unbuilt designs that Babbage reﬁned
at intervals from 1834 until his death
in 1871. Demoralized by the fate of
Di›erence Engine No. 1, he made no serious attempt to construct a full-scale
Analytical Engine. A small experimental part of the mill that was still incomplete at the time of his death, along with

How Babbage’s Di›erence Engines Work

S

hown below is one of Babbage’s 20 main drawings of
Difference Engine No. 2, which he drafted in 1847. The
machine is operated by means of the handle on the right.
Turning the handle rotates a vertical stack of 14 pairs of
cams that determine the action and timing of the calculating cycle. Numbers are stored and operated on in eight vertical columns, each of which contains 31 engraved figure
wheels. The least significant digit of a number is stored at
the bottom of the column, the most significant digit at the
top. The initial values for a calculation are entered by unlocking the figure wheels and rotating each one by hand to
the appropriate decimal value. Below the figure-wheel columns are a set of racks and levers that, when activated by
links from the cams, lift, lower and turn the vertical axes,

88

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

thereby carrying out the addition of differences. Difference
Engine No. 2 does not add numbers in sequence from right
to left, as one might expect. Instead values from odd-numbered columns are added to even-numbered columns during the first half-cycle; even-numbered columns are then
added to odd-numbered columns during the second halfcycle. This technique significantly reduces the time required
for a calculation. A similar approach, known as pipelining,
is used in modern electronic computers. The printing
assembly, located at the left, is directly coupled to the last
column of figure wheels, which bear the final result of the
calculation. Each turn of the handle produces one 30-digit
value in the table of differences and automatically prepares
the machine to generate the next number.

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

another fragment later built by Babbage’s son, Henry Prevost Babbage, are
the only signiﬁcant remains of his grand
designs.
Work on the Analytical Engine forced
Babbage to think about how to develop
mechanisms capable of automatic multiplication and division, all regulated by
a complex control system. The solutions
to those problems inspired him to design a simpler and more elegant di›erence engine, Di›erence Engine No. 2. Although the machine calculates to a precision of 31 ﬁgures, 10 digits more than
Babbage envisaged for Di›erence Engine No. 1, it contains only one third as
many parts. Babbage drew up detailed
plans for the second machine between
1847 and 1849 and o›ered them to the
government in 1852 but received no
encouragement. So things stood for
nearly a century and a half.
During several visits to London beginning in 1979, Allan G. Bromley of the
University of Sydney in Australia examined Babbage’s drawings and notebooks
in the Science Museum Library and became convinced that Di›erence Engine
No. 2 could be built and would work. I
had independently read of Babbage’s
hapless fate and become deeply puzzled as to why no one had tried to resolve the issue of Babbage’s failures by
actually building his engine.

I

n 1985, shortly after my appointment as curator of computing, Bromley appeared at the Science Museum carrying a two-page proposal to do
just that. He suggested that the museum attempt to complete the machine
by 1991, the bicentenary of Babbage’s
birth. Bromley’s proposal marked the
start of a six-year project that became
something of a personal crusade for
me. The saga of our e›ort to construct
the di›erence engine is one worthy
of Babbage himself. We embarked on a
complex engineering project that took
us into unknown technical territory and
confronted us with mechanical conundrums, funding crises and the intrigues
inherent in any major venture.
Di›erence Engine No. 2 was clearly
the engine of choice for the project. The
associated set of drawings is intact,
whereas those for Di›erence Engine No.
1 show regrettable gaps. Difference Engine No. 2 is also a more economic design. Cost and time constraints argued
in favor of ignoring the printer and concentrating on the rest of the engine. The
printer is composed of about 4,000
parts and would be a sizable engineering project in its own right.
The documentation for Di›erence
Engine No. 2 consists of 20 main design drawings and several tracings. As

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

WORKING PART of Di›erence Engine No. 1, assembled by Joseph Clement in 1832,
is the ﬁrst known automatic calculator. Its ﬂawless operation strongly supports
Babbage’s conviction that building a full-sized engine was a practical prospect.

we pored over those drawings, my colleagues and I discovered several ﬂaws
in the plans, in addition to those identiﬁed by Bromley. One major assembly
appears to be redundant. Other mechanisms are missing from the design. For
example, the initial values needed to begin a calculation are entered by unlocking the columns and manually rotating
each of the freed ﬁgure wheels to the
appropriate positions. Babbage omitted
a means of locking the columns after
they were set, so the setting-up procedure was self-corrupting.
The most serious design lapse concerned the carriage mechanism. This
crucial component ensures that if, in the
course of an addition, the value on a
ﬁgure wheel exceeds 10, then the next
higher ﬁgure wheel (indicating numbers
10 times larger) advances one digit.
The most extreme test of the carriage
mechanism occurs when a 1 is added
to a row of 9’s. Babbage solved the car-

ry problem in an exquisitely innovative
manner. During the ﬁrst part of the calculating cycle, the engine performs a
31-digit addition without carrying the
10’s, but every ﬁgure wheel that exceeds 10 sets a spring-loaded warning
device. In the second part of the cycle,
each armed warning device allows a rotating arm to advance the next higher
ﬁgure wheel by one position.
Unfortunately, the conﬁguration of
the carry mechanism shown in Babbage’s design drawings is unworkable.
The direction of rotation of the ﬁgure
wheels is incorrect, and the warningand-carry mechanism could not function as drawn. The source of these shortcomings stimulated considerable speculation. We considered the possibility
that errors were introduced deliberately as security against industrial espionage. More likely, some ﬂaws were design oversights, and others were inevitable drafting and layout errors.

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

89

None of the design problems we found
in Di›erence Engine No. 2 compromised
its overall logic or operational principles,
and we managed to devise solutions for
all. Unnecessary mechanisms were omitted. The missing locking assemblies for
the ﬁgure wheels were devised and,
where necessary, their motions derived
from those of neighboring pieces. Bromley solved the carry-mechanism problem
by mirror-reversing the incorrectly drawn
parts and altering their orientation. The
introduction of a four-to-one reduction
gear in the drive allayed skepticism about
whether the massive Di›erence Engine
No. 2 could be driven by hand. This
change made the drive handle four times
easier to turn but caused the engine to
run four times slower.
Implementing the solutions raised a
signiﬁcant philosophical dilemma. Could
we make these alterations without compromising the historical authenticity of
the result and, with it, the mission of

proving that Babbage’s engines were logically and practically sound? We solved
this problem by adhering to Babbage’s
own design practices and strictly conﬁning ourselves to techniques or devices available to Babbage. We also
planned the revisions to Babbage’s design so that every mechanism we added
could be easily removed.

I

n 1989 we built a small trial assembly at the Science Museum to verify
the logic of the basic adding element and to conﬁrm that the carry
mechanism operated correctly. The assembly adds a two-digit number to another two-digit number and takes account of any carry from units to tens
and from tens to hundreds. The ﬁnely
ﬁnished device went a long way toward
convincing sponsors and colleagues that
our project involved an engineering aesthetic as well as an intriguing historical
thesis. The trial piece later proved an

Mathematical Principles of the Di›erence Engines

B

abbage’s difference engines are so called because they use the method of
finite differences to find the value of certain mathematical expressions.
The method is used below to produce the table of cubes (y = x 3 ). The first difference is found by subtracting successive pairs of cubes. The same procedure
is applied to pairs of first differences to derive second differences. When the
process is repeated for the second differences, one finds that the third difference is constant and equal to six. This information makes it possible to generate the rest of the table of cubes by reversing the differencing procedure. For
example, adding six to the second difference (18) gives the new second difference (24); adding this to the first difference (37) yields the new first difference
(61). Finally, adding this to the last cubed number (64) gives the next number
in the sequence, 125 or 53. The procedure can be repeated indefinitely to generate as many terms as desired using only repeated additions.
The method of differences can be applied to any of the mathematical functions known as polynomials, which have the generic form y = an x n +
an – 1 x n – 1 + . . . + a1 x + a0 . The n th difference of an n th-order polynomial
will always be a constant that can form the basis for the method of differences. Polynomials are used to represent many relations in physics and engineering. They can also be used to approximate other functions, such as logarithms and trigonometric functions. In Babbage’s difference engines, each column of figure wheels represents the position of one multidigit number in the
table. Difference Engine No. 2 can tabulate 7th-order polynomials to 31 figures of accuracy, an impressive accomplishment even by modern standards.
X

X3

1

1

2

8

3

27

4

64

5
90

125

FIRST
DIFFERENCE

7
19
37
61

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

SECOND
DIFFERENCE

THIRD
DIFFERENCE

12
18
24

6
6
METHOD
OF
DIFFERENCES

invaluable aid for visualizing the machine’s operation and for testing the ﬁrst
sample parts.
To build Di›erence Engine No. 2 and
to estimate the cost of manufacturing
it, we needed full-dimension drawings of
its parts. Late in 1989 we contracted a
specialist engineering company to produce a set of drawings using Babbage’s
original set as the authoritative source.
Missing information—detailed dimensions, choice of materials, tolerances,
methods of manufacture and a great
deal of ﬁne detail—had to be supplied.
Dimensions for the individual parts
were obtained by measuring and scaling the original plans. The engineering
company produced 50 new drawings
that fully speciﬁed each of the engine’s
4,000 parts. Surviving mechanical assemblies show that Babbage constructed his parts from bronze, cast iron and
steel. Bromley and Michael Wright of
the Science Museum o›ered advice regarding which material to use for each
part. Our colleagues at the Imperial
College of Science and Technology analyzed the composition of the components of Di›erence Engine No. 1 to guide
us in selecting an appropriate modern
bronze.
No attempt was made to use period
machinery in the manufacture of parts.
The engine’s 4,000 components embody
only about 1,000 di›erent part designs,
so there is a high degree of repetition.
We unashamedly relied on modern manufacturing techniques to produce the
many identical parts. We also welded
parts that Babbage would have forged.
But we scrupulously ensured that Babbage could have produced components
of the same precision, though possibly
by other means.
Specifying the precision with which
parts should be made proved less problematic than we ﬁrst feared. Bromley
and Wright had measured parts from
Di›erence Engine No. 1 and found that
Clement achieved repeatability of 1.5
to 2.0 thousandths of an inch, belying
the popular belief that mid-19th century mechanical engineering lacked the
precision necessary for building Babbage’s devices. We adopted a modern
engineering standard, conﬁdent that it
was within the limits of what 19th-century craftsmen could achieve. The process of producing the 50 modern mechanical drawings took about six months
and was substantially complete by January 1990.
We were determined to secure a ﬁxedprice contract for manufacture and assembly so as not to repeat Babbage’s
sorry tale of open-ended expense. After some hard negotiation, the Science
Museum and the specialist company

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

ENGINEERING CHALLENGES were solved in the course of building Di›erence Engine No. 2. Engineers at the Science Museum
constructed a part of the calculating mechanism (left ) in 1989

agreed to a price and to a set of provisions to cushion against unforeseen
technical di¤culties. The Science Museum committed to underwrite the costs
against pledges from a group of ﬁve
sponsoring computer companies: ICL,
Hewlett Packard, Rank Xerox, Siemens
Nixdorf and Unisys.
Then, in June 1990, just as the ﬁnal
contract was about to be signed, the
company involved went bankrupt after
35 years in business. Reg Crick and Barrie Holloway, the two engineers on the
Babbage project, were ﬁred on Thursday, June 7. Unless orders were placed
with contractors by close of business
the following day, we would incur cost
penalties and have to embark on another round of ﬁnancial negotiation,
which would have jeopardized our goal
of completing the project in time for the
Babbage bicentenary. O¤cials at the
Science Museum interviewed Crick and
Holloway on the morning of June 8; by
lunchtime they were museum employees. We spent the day frantically writing out part orders for subcontractors
and drafting contract terms. At 5:30
P. M., I sprinted to the post o¤ce to
mail the drawings and orders to the
component manufacturers. We made
the deadline by minutes.
Di›erence Engine No. 2 was built in
public view in the Science Museum. Fitting and assembly commenced in November and was completed in May 1991.
The engine became the centerpiece in
the exhibition Making the Difference:
Charles Babbage and the Birth of the
Computer, which opened on June 27,
1991. Even then, the project kept us on
tenterhooks. The three-ton Difference
Engine No. 2 had not yet performed a
full calculation, and it kept jamming
unaccountably. We developed debugging

Copyright 1993 Scientific American, Inc.

to verify the design of the engine’s basic adding element. They
also built 210 intricate bronze levers (right , shown atop a design drawing) for the carriage mechanism.

techniques to track the source of the
jams and continued to work on the machine during the exhibition. On November 29, 1991, less than a month before
Babbage’s 200th birthday, the machine
completed its ﬁrst full-scale successful
calculation. It produced the ﬁrst 100
values in the table of powers of seven
and has functioned without error ever
since. The engine ended up costing just
under £300,000 ($500,000).

O

ur project illuminated several
aspects of Babbage’s skills as a
designer and engineer. Historians of technology have debated whether the high standards of precision that
Babbage demanded were necessary or
were the product of misguided perfectionism. Some researchers have pointed out that cruder engines had been
built to good e›ect. Georg and Edvard
Scheutz, a Swedish father-and-son team
who were inspired by an account of
Babbage’s work, built three di›erence
engines, mostly of their own design. The
ﬁrst of these, completed in 1843, had a
wood frame and was made using simple hand tools and a primitive lathe.
Despite its comparatively rough construction, the Scheutzes’ machine performed successfully before the Swedish Royal Academy.
Babbage’s di›erence engines were
larger and more sophisticated than
those attempted by the Scheutzes, however. Our experiences constructing Difference Engine No. 2 underscored the
importance of exacting standards. We
had expected that repeat parts made
using computer-controlled machines
would be su¤ciently identical to be interchangeable. This proved not to be the
case. Fine tweaking of components to
tolerances of no more than a few thou-

sandths of an inch proved necessary,
especially for the proper operation of
the carry mechanism. Babbage’s insistence on high precision was evidently
based on sound engineering judgment.
Constructing Di›erence Engine No. 2
revealed subtleties and ingenuity in Babbage’s design not immediately evident
in the drawings. The project also gave
us tremendous respect for Babbage’s
ability to visualize the operation of complex mechanisms without the aid of
physical models. We hope to extend our
explorations of Babbage’s elegant designs; to do so, we are currently trying
to attract sponsorship to build the printer. In the meantime, we marvel at the
physical realization of plans that Babbage drew up nearly 150 years ago. Difference Engine No. 2 stands as a splendid piece of engineering sculpture, a
monument to the rigorous logic of its
inventor.

FURTHER READING
CHARLES BABBAGE: PIONEER OF THE COMPUTER. Anthony Hyman. Princeton University Press, 1982.
DIFFERENCE AND ANALYTICAL ENGINES.
Allan G. Bromley in Computing before
Computers. Edited by William Aspray.
Iowa State University Press, 1990.
GLORY AND FAILURE: THE
DIFFERENCE
..
ENGINES OF JOHANN MULLER, CHARLES
BABBAGE AND GEORG AND EDVARD
SCHEUTZ. Michael Lindgren. MIT Press,
1990.
CHARLES BABBAGE AND HIS CALCULATING ENGINES. Doron Swade. Science Museum, London, 1991.
A MODERN DIFFERENCE ENGINE: SOFTWARE SIMULATORS FOR CHARLES BABBAGE’S DIFFERENCE ENGINE NO. 2. James
Donnelly. Armstrong Publishing Company, 1992.

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN February 1993

91

