Ada Lovelace and the Logic of the Analytical Engine

Philip Welch, School of Mathematics.

Annabella Milbanke 1792-1860

George Byron 1788-1824

Byron leaving England

George Cruickshank 1816

Augusta Ada Byron 1815-1852

Ada Byron, Age 17

Charles Babbage 1791-1871

Difference Engine No. 1 (portion) 1832

William King, Earl of Ockham,
later Lord Lovelace 1805-1893

Byron in Abyssinian dress

Ashley Combe, Somerset

“ ‘Mathematics’ should be written on my jaw ”

as Lady King, (Age 20)
by Margaret Carpenter, 1835

after a sketch by A.E. Chalon 1838. (Age 23)

J.R. Jacquard 1752-1834

A Jacquard Loom

The Analytical Engine

Punched Cards: Operator & Variable

Lovelace: ”The bounds of arithmetic were outstepped the moment of
applying the cards had occured”

And 150 years later . . .

Luigi Federico Menabrea, 1805-1893

& later Prime Minister of Italy

Menabrea’s article - 1842

• He describes the Analytical Engine in great detail - not the would be
physical construction, but the methodology of the computations.
• He gives three examples of calculations. We’ll look at that for a simple
(2 £ 2) simultaneous equation with unknowns x and y:
mx + ny
m0 x + n0 y

=
=

d
d0

y=

d0 m ° dm0
mn0 ° m0 n

This will have solution:
x=

dn0 ° d0 n
n0 m ° nm0

;

Bernoulli Numbers
• These are a sequence of fractions B1 , B3 , B5 , . . . B2n+1 , . . . They crop up
again and again in analysis and number theory. There are many ways to
define them.
• We can define them through a power series
x

ex °1
Or explicitly:

2

4

6

= 1 ° x2 + B1 x2! + B3 x4! + B5 x6! + · · ·
√ !
k vm
B2m+1 =
(°1)v
.
v
k
+
1
k=0 v=0
m X
k
X

Lovelace chose:

B2m+1 = °

m°1
X
k=0

√

!

2m + 1
B2k+1
.
2k + 1 2m ° 2k + 1

Her choice looks like:

B2m+1 = a1 B1 + a3 B3 + · · · + a2m°1 B2m°1
Rearranging:

Rearranging:

B3 = a1 B1
B5 = d1 B1 + d3 B3
B7 = e1 B1 + e3 B3 + e5 B5
• So her programme to compute B7 proceeds by computing first B1 , then
B3 from B1 ; then B5 from B3 and B1 etc.
• This is known as a course-of-values recursion because it requires the
complete course of all the previous values to get the next one.
• An (ordinary) recursion would just have defined B3 in terms of B1 , and B5
in terms of B3 , B7 in terms of B5 , that is using only the most immediate
previous value etc.

B3 = a1 B1
B5 = d30 B3
B7 = e50 B5

Lovelace’s programme to compute Bernoulli Numbers

Was the Analytical Engine just a larger Difference Engine?

• The Difference Engine, although it had the same arithmetical operations
as the Analytical Engine, was logically on a lower plane.

Was the Analytical Engine just a larger Difference Engine?

• The Difference Engine, although it had the same arithmetical operations
as the Analytical Engine, was logically on a lower plane.
The DE could perform the following operations:
œ
œ
œ

The arithmetical operations +, £, ° are operations.
Any sequence of operations is an operation.

(Iteration) Any finite iteration of an operation is an operation.

Was the Analytical Engine just a larger Difference Engine?

• The Difference Engine, although it had the same arithmetical operations
as the Analytical Engine, was logically on a lower plane.
The DE could perform the following operations:
œ
œ
œ

The arithmetical operations +, £, ° are operations.
Any sequence of operations is an operation.

(Iteration) Any finite iteration of an operation is an operation.

(Today we should say that the DE could compute any primitively recursive
function.) But the Analytical Engine additionally had:
œ

Conditional iteration If P is an operation and T is a test on register
contents, then the result of iterating P until T succeeds is an
operation.

Flowchart for a Shepherdson-Sturgis-Minsky Register Machine

Was the Analytical Engine ‘Universal’?

• A universal computer is one equipped with a universal program that is
one that could theoretically emulate the action of every other program.
Turing, defining the term, proved that his ‘machines’ were universal.
• What Babbage and Lovelace lacked, was a coding method, a way of
coding up program instructions by numbers, which a universal machine
could decode and then simulate.
• Kurt Gödel (1930) gave a way of coding alphabets, then words, then
sentences for use in his famous Incompleteness Theorems. Turing then
used this idea to code up programs (1936). Using this a Shep.-S-M Register
machine only needs a half dozen Registers to be a fully universal machine.

Was the Analytical Engine ‘Universal’?

• A universal computer is one equipped with a universal program that is
one that could theoretically emulate the action of every other program.
Turing, defining the term, proved that his ‘machines’ were universal.
• What Babbage and Lovelace lacked, was a coding method, a way of
coding up program instructions by numbers, which a universal machine
could decode and then simulate.
• Kurt Gödel (1930) gave a way of coding alphabets, then words, then
sentences for use in his famous Incompleteness Theorems. Turing then
used this idea to code up programs (1936). Using this a Shep.-S-M Register
machine only needs a half dozen Registers to be a fully universal machine.
So the answer is “Yes”: the Analytical Engine, using Turing and Gödel’s
ideas, can be seen to be universal.
Moreover as Turing showed, the programs could also be treated as data, and
simple be stored inside the machine prior to operation.

The vistas beyond

Neither Babbage, nor Lovelace knew of universality, but both saw
potentialities beyond the calculations they programmed.
Babbage’s thesis:
“These two memoirs [Menabrea’s and Lovelace’s articles] furnish a
complete demonstration - that the whole of the development and
operations of analysis are capable of being executed by machinery.”
(Babbage’s italics.)

Do machines think? “Lovelace’s Objection”

Lovelace:
“It is desirable to guard against the possibility of exaggerated ideas that
might arise as to the powers of the Analytical Engine [which] has no
pretensions whatever to originate anything. It can do whatever we know
how to order it to perform . . . . but it has no power of anticipating any
analytical relations or truths.”
• This is discussed in a famous paper by Turing in the journal Mind on the
possibility of machines having intelligent thought.

But again. . . .

Lovelace:
“Again it might act upon things other than number, . . . Supposing for
instance , that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds in the science
of harmony and of musical composition were susceptible of such
expression and adaptations, the engine might compose elaborate and
scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent.”

The effect on computing machinery on pure mathematics

Lovelace again:
“It is however pretty evident, on general principles, that in devising for
mathematical truths a new form in which to record and throw themselves
out for actual use, views are likely to be induced, which should again react
on the more theoretical phase of the subject”

