History of Psychology
2005, Vol. 8, No. 1, 35– 45

Copyright 2005 by the Educational Publishing Foundation
1093-4510/05/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/1093-4510.8.1.35

WAS BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE
INTENDED TO BE A MECHANICAL MODEL OF
THE MIND?
Christopher D. Green
York University
In the 1830s, Charles Babbage worked on a mechanical computer he dubbed the
Analytical Engine. Although some people around Babbage described his invention
as though it had authentic mental powers, Babbage refrained from making such
claims. He does not, however, seem to have discouraged those he worked with from
mooting the idea publicly. This article investigates whether (1) the Analytical
Engine was the focus of a covert research program into the mechanism of mentality;
(2) Babbage opposed the idea that the Analytical Engine had mental powers but
allowed his colleagues to speculate as they saw ﬁt; or (3) Babbage believed such
claims to be fanciful, but cleverly used the publicity they engendered to draw public
and political attention to his project.

Charles Babbage (1791–1871) was the inventor of a number of mechanical
devices that were intended to compute mathematical and logical functions.1 The
two most famous are the Difference Engine, dating from the 1820s, which was to
have calculated and printed basic mathematical tables of various kinds, and the
Analytical Engine. The Analytical Engine, for which designs began in the mid1830s, was a much more ambitious project because it was to have employed
then-recent developments in abstract symbolic algebra, thereby extending its
range into the logical realm rather than being limited to the strictly mathematical.
Neither machine was ever completed, though Babbage built two small models of
the Difference Engine.
For many decades now, it has not been uncommon to ﬁnd Charles Babbage
named in both popular and scholarly publications as one of the primary “forefathers” of computer science. This trend began with the public pronouncements of
Howard Aiken, the designer of the Harvard Mark I “computer” in the 1940s, who
repeatedly paid homage to Babbage and claimed to have been the one to ﬁnally
fulﬁll “Babbage’s Dream,” as he often put it.
More recently, there has been a trend to cite Babbage as a father of compuChristopher D. Green is a professor in the History & Theory of Psychology program at York
University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. He holds PhDs in psychology (1992) and philosophy (2004)
from the University of Toronto. In January 2006 he will become Editor of the Journal of the History
of the Behavioral Sciences.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Christopher D. Green, Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada. E-mail:
christo@yorku.ca
1
Much of the material presented here previously appeared in “Charles Babbage, the Analytical
Engine, and the Possibility of a 19th-Century Cognitive Science.” In C. D. Green, T. Teo, & M.
Shore (Eds.), The Transformation of Psychology: Inﬂuences of 19th-Century Philosophy, Technology, and Natural Science (pp. 133–152). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

35

36

GREEN

tational cognitive science as well (e.g., Gardner, 1985; Garnham, 1987; Haugeland, 1985; Hofstadter, 1979; Pylyshyn, 1984). Though it has received little
serious consideration, this is a striking attribution, for it implies that Babbage not
only intended his machines to compute useful functions, but that he also thought
the operation of his machines in some way closely paralleled the operations of the
human mind. In this article I examine this claim. What I ultimately discover is that
Babbage himself was reluctant to associate the activities of his machines with the
operations of the mind, but he seems to have been happy to allow others, even
some who worked closely under his guidance, to come very close to attributing to
them actual mental powers. The question we are left with, then, is whether he did
this because (1) he was indeed engaged in covert psychological research, (2) he
was simply so liberal minded that he allowed even his closest associates to
publicly speak their minds even when their opinions of his work conﬂicted with
his own, or (3) he allowed his assistants to risk their own reputations by making
controversial claims in the hope that it would draw public attention to his project
which he could then use to his advantage.

The Origins of the Analytical Engine
Babbage had ﬁrst made a name for himself in the late 1810s when he led a
mathematical revolution at Cambridge to switch from the clumsy Newtonian
notation for calculus to the more easily manipulated Leibnizian notation. For his
efforts, Babbage was made a fellow of the Royal Society at the age of only 24. His
“revolutionary fervor” was not spent, however. Frustrated with the stodgy and
aristocratic Royal Society, Babbage and a number of other “entrepreneur-scientists” (see Ashworth, 1994) formed the rival Astronomical Society in 1820. The
Astronomical Society began life by attacking the Royal Society-endorsed Board
of Longitude, which was then making up a set of new astronomical tables. While
busy discovering errors in the Board of Longitude’s tables (and just about
everyone else’s), Babbage hit upon the idea of developing a machine that would
calculate and print the required numbers automatically, so that there could be no
mistakes either in computation or copying. The machine he designed implemented
a then-common mathematical technique for calculating polynomials, from which
the values of a wide array of other functions could be approximated. The
technique was called the “method of differences,” and thus the machine was
dubbed the “Difference Engine.”2 He built a small working model in 1822, for
2

The method of differences allows complicated problems to be turned into simple addition
problems by relying on the fact that polynomials have certain constant relations to each other. For
instance, the square of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . . are 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, . . . By subtracting each
square from the square above it in the series (e.g., 1 – 0, 4 – 1, 9 – 4, . . .), one gets 1, 3, 5, 7, 9,. . .
These are called the “ﬁrst differences” of the squares. If one subtracts each of these differences from
the one above it in the series (e.g., 3 – 1, 5 – 3, 7 – 5, . . .), the outcome is 2 in every case. These
are called “second differences.” Once one knows that the second differences between any square in
the series is 2, one can use the process in reverse to obtain a square simply by adding. For instance,
what is the square of 7? It is 2 more distant from the square of 6 than the square of 6 is from the
square of 5. The square of 6 is 2 more distant from the square of 5 than the square of 5 is from the
square of 4, and so on down to 0. Of course, this is a fairly cumbersome procedure for a human (who
can multiply), but for a machine that can only add (and that can do so extremely quickly and
accurately) it is a virtually ideal algorithm. Of course, ﬁguring out the square of 7 is not going to

SPECIAL ISSUE: BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE

37

which he won the Astronomical Society’s “Gold Medal.” He then applied for
assistance to build a full-scale version of the Engine to the Royal Society itself.
Davies Gilbert, the Royal’s treasurer, lobbied the government on Babbage’s
behalf. The Duke of Wellington, then Prime Minister, approved £1,000 for its
construction in 1823 (Hyman, 1982, p. 52). Babbage found that the machine was
more expensive to build than he had expected, so he asked for and received more
money from the government, and then more, and still more. By 1833, a decade
later, he had received over £17,000, and still no working machine had been
completed (but for a new scale model that he kept in his house as a showpiece).
The government ﬁnally suspended the project in the mid-1830s, ofﬁcially withdrawing their support in 1842. Then-Prime Minister Robert Peel is reported to
have quipped that, if ever completed, the Difference Engine should ﬁrst be set to
calculating how much money went into its construction.
In the late 1820s, Babbage toured Europe, devoting much of his travel to
studying Continental means of industry and manufacture. One of the things he
discovered was the system set up by Marie de Prony (1755–1839) in Revolutionary France for the calculation and publication of new logarithmic and trigonometric tables. Faced with this monumental task, De Prony had innovatively
applied Adam Smith’s (1723–1790) analysis of the division of labor (Smith, 1776,
chap. 1), developed for traditional manual work, to what was a mental task. He
established three sections of mental laborers: The ﬁrst section was to consist of the
best mathematicians in the land, who would seek out or develop the easiest
methods of calculating the functions desired; the second section, consisting of six
or eight junior mathematicians, would take the formulae developed by the ﬁrst
section and plug in the actual numbers required; the third section, made up of 60
or 80 people who could only add and subtract, would do the actual computations
and return the results to the second section for checking. Babbage, in chapter 20
of his 1832 book On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, hints that his
Difference Engine could replace the whole third section of laborers in De Prony’s
system. It is notable, however, that throughout the chapter the emphasis is on
efﬁciency and economy; the nature of mental processes themselves is never at
issue. As we shall see, Babbage seems to have assiduously and subtly dodged the
question of the nature of the mind throughout his career.
It was in 1833 that he ﬁrst met the future Ada Lovelace, then known as Ada
Byron, the only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron. Then aged 17, Ada was
enjoying her ﬁrst London season. Among other things, Babbage was well known
for his Saturday soirées, and Lady Byron and her daughter were invited along with
much of London Society. Babbage’s scale model Difference Engine was displayed along with other mechanical devices of a more obviously entertaining
nature. Lady Byron recorded in her diary that in mid-June 1833 they went to see
what she called “the thinking machine” at Babbage’s house (cited in Stein, 1985,
p. 42). This is the ﬁrst of many references to Babbage’s machines actually having
mental powers. What Lady Byron’s remark shows is that even at this early date,
test the capacity of most humans, but when the problems become so complicated or numerous (as
in the construction of mathematical tables) that humans begin to make errors, the machine’s
accuracy becomes critical. (I leave it as an exercise for the reader to show that all third differences
in the series of cubes is equal to 6.)

38

GREEN

before the plan for the more sophisticated Analytical Engine had even been
developed, the idea was already “in the air.”
During the middle and late 1830s, Babbage began developing a design for the
Analytical Engine. Unlike the Difference Engine, which could only calculate
functions reducible to the method of differences, the Analytical Engine would be
able to calculate any function whatsoever. Indeed, he often claimed that ultimately
it would be able to carry out symbolic algebra, then considered to be one of the
highest forms of rational thought known. To accomplish this extraordinary task,
Babbage adapted the technology developed by Joseph-Marie Jacquard (1752–
1834) in his famous automated loom of 1801: He would lash cards together end
to end and punch holes in them that could be “read” by a number of movable pins
in the machine. The holes would “encode,” as we would now say, information
about which operations to employ over which symbols. Given a sophisticated
enough control system for the cards, one would be able to repeat the same set of
cards an indeterminate number of times (now called “looping,” but he called it
“backing” the cards), and one would be able to decide which cards to execute on
the basis of intermediate results obtained during the computational process (now
known as “conditional branching”). Both processes are central to modern computing theory.
Babbage attempted to obtain support for his new project but found it impossible to do so. Few understood the potential of the new invention. Few of those
who did thought it would be practicable to build a machine so complex. Fewer
still believed that Babbage was the man to ﬁnish the project, given the ﬁasco with
the still-unﬁnished Difference Engine. Babbage began on his own nevertheless. In
1840 he was invited by the well-known Italian scientist Giovanni Plana to give a
series of lectures on the Analytical Engine in Turin. An article based on the
lectures was to be written by a then-unknown Italian military engineer, Luigi
Frederico Menabrea (1809 –1896). (Menabrea would later go on to become a
general in Garibaldi’s army, and eventually Foreign Minister and Premier of the
newly uniﬁed Italian state.) Babbage’s hand was never far from the article written
under Menabrea’s name. He spent a good deal of 1841 corresponding with
Menabrea about the article, even prompting the young Italian to entirely rewrite
his article at one point (Hyman, 1982, p. 190). It appeared in French in the Swiss
journal Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève in 1842. In February of 1843, Charles
Wheatstone— coinventor of the telegraph and a friend of Babbage—suggested to
Ada, now Lovelace, that she produce an English translation of Menabrea’s article.
According to Babbage, when Lovelace presented him with the completed translation, he suggested that she write some notes explicating parts that had been since
superseded by new developments. As with the original Menabrea article, his
involvement in the writing of the notes was signiﬁcant. The translation and notes
appeared in the September 1843 issue of Richard Taylor’s Scientiﬁc Memoirs—an
English journal that specialized in communicating Continental European scientiﬁc
activities to the British scientiﬁc community (Menabrea, 1961).
Ada Lovelace’s translation of and notes to Menabrea’s article did not have the
impact that Babbage must have hoped they would. Although Lovelace was a
bright person, to be sure, she was not a serious scientist or mathematician. She had
never before published a scientiﬁc article, nor would she publish another in the
remaining 9 years of her life. There can be little doubt that Babbage’s main goal

SPECIAL ISSUE: BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE

39

in working with Lovelace was to have a public show of support from a member
of the nobility who might have some inﬂuence on the royal court. It came to
nothing, however.

Was the Analytical Engine Thought to Be Cognitive?
As mentioned above, in recent years Babbage has been frequently put in the
role of “trailblazer” in books and articles not only about computer science, but in
those about cognitive science as well. The question is, then, whether this status is
really justiﬁed. Were either Babbage, Menabrea, or Lovelace of the opinion that
the Analytical Engine really would have been able to think—like humans
think—if it had been completed? In this half of the article I try to show that
Babbage seems to have been wary of answering this question straightforwardly
throughout his life. Menabrea denied the possibility outright. Lovelace often
wrote as if she believed it to be true, but at other times made what appear to be
forthright denials of the possibility. Given that Babbage had so much inﬂuence
over her writing, it is interesting to speculate about why he allowed her to
occasionally stray over this line if he was unwilling to do so himself. One reason
that he restrained himself may have been, or so I will argue, that for him to have
done so would have made him appear to endorse mechanistic materialism, which
would likely have been tantamount professional suicide in early Victorian England (see, e.g., Winter, 1997). But if this was his fear, then his reasons for his not
dissuading Lovelace from doing so remain obscure. First I will examine the
Menabrea/Lovelace paper for indications of the kind of cognitive theory, if any,
that is contained therein. Then I will survey Babbage’s comments on the topic and
offer an interpretation of them.
Menabrea opens his paper by claiming that the tasks of mathematics may be
divided into two parts, “one of which may be called the mechanical, . . .while the
other demanding the intervention of reason, belongs more specially to the domain
of the understanding” (p. 225).3 Machinery, he went on almost analytically, may
be employed to execute the mechanical portion of mathematics. After a brief
mention of Blaise Pascal’s mechanical adding machine, Menabrea then reviewed
the portion of Babbage’s Economy of Machinery in which De Prony’s scheme for
producing mathematical tables was discussed, and stated outright that the third
section of workers could be replaced by the Difference Engine. Here Lovelace
inserts her ﬁrst note. She ﬁrst takes pains to deny that the Analytical Engine has
any relation whatever to the Difference Engine—a claim that Babbage needed to
make stick if he were to have people take seriously his pleas for support for the
new project. She then goes on to describe the difference between them as follows:
In studying the action of the Analytical Engine, we ﬁnd that the peculiar and
independent nature of the considerations which in all mathematical analysis belong
to operations, as distinguished from the objects operated upon and from the results
of the operations performed upon those objects, is very strikingly deﬁned and
separated. . . .
It may be desirable to explain that by the word operation, we mean any process
which alters the mutual relation of two or more things, be this relation of what kind
3

All page references for this article are to the reprint found in Morrison and Morrison (1961).

40

GREEN

it may. . . . In abstract mathematics, of course operations alter those particular
relations which are involved in the consideration of number and space. . . . But the
science of operations . . . is a science of itself and has its own abstract truth and
value; just as logic has its own particular truth and value, independently of the
subjects to which we apply its reasonings and processes. (pp. 247–248)

Here we have a fairly standard formulation of the new formal approach to algebra
then being pioneered by Lovelace’s calculus teacher, Augustus De Morgan.
Lovelace likely learned this orientation toward algebra from De Morgan himself
and from the textbook he assigned to her, George Peacock’s Treatise on Algebra
(1803), in which the revolutionary distinction was ﬁrst made between “arithmetical algebra”—the traditional manipulation of numerical expressions via symbols—and “symbolic algebra”—a new general discipline of abstract symbol
manipulation, of which the arithmetical form was but a single application.
Lovelace then moves on to exemplify her claims about abstract algebra:
Supposing, for instance, that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds in the
science of harmony and of musical composition were susceptible of such expression and adaptations, the engine might compose elaborate and scientiﬁc pieces of
music of any degree of complexity or extent.
The Analytical Engine is an embodying of the science of operations. (p. 249)

Today this passage is often mistaken for the claim that the Engine would be
“intelligent” enough to compose music, but that is not really its thrust at all. The
aim is to drive a wedge between abstract algebra—the “science of operations”—
and mathematics; to show that the operations can operate over symbols representing objects other than numbers, such as musical notes.
After describing the differences between the two Engines even more fully, she
then makes a claim that might seem to virtually commit her, and perhaps
Babbage, to mechanistic materialism with respect to the mind (very close to the
time that Helmholtz, Brücke, Bois-Reymond, and Virchow were declaring themselves to be mechanists in Berlin, Germany):
In enabling mechanism to combine together general symbols in successions of
unlimited variety and extent, a uniting link is established between the operations
of matter and the abstract mental process of the most abstract branch of mathematical science. . . . We are not aware of its being on record that anything
partaking in the nature of what is so well designated the Analytical Engine has
been hitherto proposed, or even thought of, as a practical possibility, any more than
the idea of a thinking or of a reasoning machine.

Here she claims outright that the Analytical Engine serves as a “uniting link”
between mind and matter, and then says that no one else had yet proposed a
machine like the Analytical Engine any more than they had proposed a thinking
machine. Although she stops somewhat short of the explicit claim that the
Analytical Engine is itself such a thinking machine, the clear intent appears to be
to raise the possibility for serious discussion.
Returning to Menabrea’s original text, having just stated that the Difference
Engine could replace De Prony’s third section of workers (those who actually
carry out the calculations) he goes on then to virtually claim that the new

SPECIAL ISSUE: BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE

41

Analytical Engine would be able to replace the second section as well (those who
plug the numbers into the formulas produced by the expert mathematicians in the
ﬁrst section). He is careful to point out, however, that the machine “must exclude
all methods of trial and guess-work, and can only admit the direct process of
calculation.” This is necessarily the case, he goes on to say, because “the machine
is not a thinking being [italics added], but simply an automaton which acts
according to the laws imposed upon it” (p. 230). This would seem to close the
matter deﬁnitively, but Lovelace adds a footnote here, saying that “this must not
be understood in too unqualiﬁed a manner. The engine is capable, under certain
circumstances, of feeling [italics added] about to discover which of two or more
possible contingencies has occurred” p. 230). What exactly she meant by this is
not entirely clear, but she appears to be referring to the Engine’s conditional
branching ability. Why she took this to manifest itself as a “feeling” is anyone’s
guess, though Babbage’s occasional picturesque references to this power as
“foresight” may be the source.
So already we can see a tension between two different ways of viewing the
machine. On the one hand, according to Lovelace, it “unites” matter and mentality. She cannot quite bring herself to calling it a “thinking machine,” but she’s
willing to say that it “feels” in some sense. On the other hand, according to
Menabrea, it is deﬁnitely not a “thinking being,” just an automaton. Under other
circumstances one might regard this simply as a difference of opinion, but since
both these writers had one and the same mentor—Charles Babbage—a more
interesting dynamic may be at play.
Menabrea says nothing more about the possible relation between the operation of the Analytical Engine and that of the human mind in the rest of his article,
but Lovelace includes one more major speculation in her notes—the passage that
Alan Turing (1950), over a century later, would dub the “Lovelace Objection” to
artiﬁcial intelligence:
It is desirable to guard against the possibility of exaggerated ideas that might arise
as to the powers of the Analytical Engine. In considering any new subject, there
is frequently a tendency, ﬁrst, to overrate what we ﬁnd to be already interesting or
remarkable; and, second, by a sort of natural reaction, to undervalue the true state
of the case, when we do discover that our notions have surpassed those that were
really tenable.
The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate anything. It can do
whatever we know how to order it to perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no
power of anticipating any analytical relations or truths. (p. 284)

If there were ever a question of Lovelace’s believing that the machine would
actually be able to think, this passage would seem to scotch it— certainly Turing
thought so— but in combination with her earlier statements about it unifying mind
and matter, and its being able to “feel,” it is hard to know exactly what opinion
to attribute to her, or indeed to her mentor, Babbage.
Babbage’s comments on the topic were always very careful. He almost
invariably referred to the machine’s activities as being able to “replace” or
“substitute for” mental activities, or occasionally as being “analogous” to them,
but only very rarely as being able to carry them out itself. For instance, in his

42

GREEN

autobiography (Babbage, 1864/1994), in the midst of a discussion of his difﬁculties in mechanizing the process of “carrying” from one column of numbers to
another in addition problems, he says, “the mechanical means I employed to make
these carriages bears some slight analogy to the operation of the faculty of
memory” (p. 46). With this deﬂationary statement in place, he says later on the
same page that “it occurred to me that it might be possible to teach mechanism to
accomplish another mental process, namely—to foresee” (p. 46). He then goes on
to explain what we would call conditional branching.
What are we to think of Babbage’s “true” beliefs on the matter? Was the ﬁrst
comment about memory a mere “foot in the door” that would allow him to slide
to the stronger claim about foresight, or is the claim about foresight to be regarded
as a mere “shorthand” for his real position, given just above it, that the activities
of the machine are only “slightly analogous” to mental activities? Babbage seems
to have clariﬁed his position in a paper entitled “On the Mathematical Powers of
the Calculating Engine” that had been authored back in 1837 (but that went
unpublished until 1973):
In substituting mechanism for the performance of operations hitherto executed by
intellectual labor it is continually necessary to speak of contrivances by which
certain alterations in parts of the machine enable it to execute or refrain from
executing particular functions. The analogy [italics added] between these acts and
the operations of mind almost forced upon me the ﬁgurative [italics added]
employment of the same terms. They were found at once convenient and expressive and I prefer continuing their use rather than substituting lengthened circumlocutions.
For instance, the expression “the engine knows, and so forth” means that one out
of many possible results of its calculations has happened and that a certain change
in its arrangement has taken place by which it is compelled to carry on the next
computation in a certain appointed way. (Babbage, 1989, Vol. 3, p. 31)

Thus, it seems to have simply been a matter of verbal shorthand for Babbage, not
a literal claim of mentality.
One other interesting passage occurs in the posthumous biography of Babbage
written, at his direction, by his long-time friend Harry Wilmot Buxton (not
published until 1988). It begins as though a profound claim concerning the
intelligence of the Engine is about to be defended:
It is manifest that the language of algebra is more simple and precise than the
symbols of language expressed by sound, and it would seem therefore within
the range of our intelligence to be able to reduce our thoughts in most cases
into the form of mathematical language, and thus adapt the subject of our enquiry
to the operations of the Analytical Engine. (Buxton, 1988, p. 155)

Buxton then goes on, however, to make a rather vague claim about Babbage’s
aspirations in this regard—“Mr. Babbage entertained no doubt of the possibility
of extending the powers of the Analytical Engine, far beyond the domain of
abstract analysis” (p. 155)— but then he immediately shifts to a long quotation
from Hobbes in which it was claimed that reasoning is nothing more than
calculation. Buxton next suggests that the Analytical Engine could have established Hobbes’ claim if only it had been equipped with letters of the alphabet and

SPECIAL ISSUE: BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE

43

the plus and minus signs, in addition to numerals. Having gotten this far, however,
he closes with the admission that “as Mr. Babbage himself has not recorded his
views upon the subject, it might be deemed presumptuous to indulge in speculations or enter into details which he did not deem necessary” (Buxton, 1988, p.
156). So it appears that even Babbage’s closest friends were not of the opinion
that he believed his machines to be literally intelligent.

Conclusion
In this article I have attempted to establish that, contrary to what is often
found in textbooks, Babbage did not believe the Analytical Engine to have been
a contribution to what we would now call cognitive science. Why might Babbage
have refrained from taking such a step? Such speculation was rampant about him:
Lady Byron had called even the lowly Difference Engine a “thinking machine”;
Buxton certainly entertained the idea that human reasoning might be nothing more
than what the Analytical Engine was intended to do; even Ada Lovelace intermittently raised the possibility. What held Babbage back?
Two things come immediately to mind. The ﬁrst is that in Regency and early
Victorian England, declaring oneself to be a mechanist materialist with respect to
the mind would have been professionally foolish in the extreme. Alison Winter
(1997) has written a fascinating chapter on the philosophical traps of this sort that
the famed physiologist William Benjamin Carpenter—who, incidentally, brieﬂy
served as tutor to Ada Lovelace’s children— had to avoid in launching his career
during the 1830s and 1840s; dangers that, for instance, the notorious mesmerist
John Eliotson had failed to negotiate effectively, leading to his resignation from
University College in 1838.
Tempting as it might be, however, one should not conclude that Babbage
somehow “secretly” believed the Analytical Engine to be truly intelligent, but
would not say so publicly for fear of censure. Babbage, though liberal, appears to
have been a sincerely religious man. When William Whewell published in 1833
the ﬁrst in a series of works commissioned to defend the thesis that God’s
“design” can be discovered in the organization of the natural world, Babbage felt
compelled to write a book-length response, his so-called Ninth Bridgewater
Treatise (1837). Signiﬁcantly, Babbage’s objection to Whewell was not that he
defended “natural theology,” as it was then called, but rather that Whewell had
argued that nothing of the divine could be found in the “deductive” sciences, but
only in “inductive” forms of knowledge. Babbage was incensed, not only because
this excluded the truths of mathematics from the realm of the “divine”—a position
Babbage was keen to defend— but also because the intent of Whewell’s remarks
was to devalue the work of recent Continental scientists (e.g., Euler, Laplace,
Lagrange). Babbage thought these to be the very examples to which the English
should look to improve their science (Richards, 1992, pp. 60 – 61). Although
Babbage argued that miracles might be the result of a “divine mechanism” the
underlying principles of which we humans can only partially comprehend, his
suggestion was not that God Himself is such a mechanism; it was, by contrast, that
only a truly divine intelligence could craft a mechanism so intricate as that found
in nature.
To conclude, then, Babbage does not seem to have regarded the Analytical

44

GREEN

Engine as a kind of intelligence, or even as revealing anything of particular
signiﬁcance about the nature of the human mind. Attributions of such opinions to
him by modern cognitive scientists and their intellectual kin are primarily anachronistic. His primary interests in his Engines were industrial and economic. He
saw them as bringing the very same principles of division of labor to the realm of
mental work that he supported in the realm of manufacture. Indeed, one might
argue that the powers of his Engines served to distinguish precisely between those
aspects of the human mind that were thought to be merely mechanical and those
that were regarded as being truly original, creative, rational, and ultimately divine
in character.

References
Ashworth, W. J. (1994). The calculating eye: Baily, Herschel, Babbage and the business
of astronomy. British Journal of the History of Science, 27, 409 – 441.
Babbage, C. (1832). On the economy of machinery and manufactures. London: Charles
Knight.
Babbage, C. (1837). Ninth Bridgewater treatise. London: John Murray.
Babbage, C. (1989). On the mathematical powers of the calculating engine. In M.
Campbell-Kelly (Ed.), The works of Charles Babbage (Vol. 3, pp. 15– 61). New
York: New York University Press.
Babbage, C. (1994). Passages from the life of a philosopher. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press. (Original work published 1864)
Buxton, H. W. (1988). Memoir of the life and labours of the late Charles Babbage Esq.,
F. R. S. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind’s new science. New York: Basic Books.
Garnham, A. (1987). Artiﬁcial intelligence: An introduction. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Green, C. D. (2001). Charles Babbage, the analytical engine, and the possibility of a
19th-century cognitive science. In C. D. Green, T. Teo, & M. Shore (Eds.), The
transformation of psychology: Inﬂuences of 19th-century philosophy, technology,
and natural science (pp. 133–152). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Haugeland, J. (1985). Artiﬁcial intelligence: The very idea. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Gödel, Escher Bach: An eternal golden braid. New York:
Random House.
Hyman, R. A. (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the computer. Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Menabrea, L. F. (1961). Sketch of the analytical engine invented by Charles Babbage,
Esq. (A. A. Lovelace, Trans.). In P. Morrison & E. Morrison (Eds.), Charles Babbage
and his calculating engines; selected writings by Charles Babbage and others (pp.
225–297). New York: Dover. (Original work published 1842. Translation originally
published 1843)
Morrison, P., & Morrison, E. (Eds.). (1961). Charles Babbage and his calculating
engines; selected writings by Charles Babbage and others. New York: Dover.
Peacock, G. F. E. (1803). A treatise on algebra. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition: Toward a foundation for cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Richards, J. L. (1992). God, truth, and mathematics in nineteenth century England. In
M. J. Nye, J. L. Richards, & R. Stuewer (Eds.), The invention of physical sciences:

SPECIAL ISSUE: BABBAGE’S ANALYTICAL ENGINE

45

Intersections of mathematics, theology and natural philosophy since the seventeenth
century (pp. 51–78). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Smith, A. (1776). An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations (2 vols.).
London: W. Strahan & T. Cadell.
Stein, D. (1985). Ada: A life and a legacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, 59, 433– 460.
Whewell, W. (1833). Astronomy and general physics considered with reference to natural
theology. London: W. Pickering.
Winter, A. (1997). The construction of orthodoxies and heterodoxies in early Victorian
England. In B. Lightman (Ed.), Victorian science in context (pp. 24 –50). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Received June 10, 2004
Accepted September 6, 2004 y

Correction to Kosits (2004)
The article “Of Faculties, Fallacies, and Freedom: Dilemma and Irony in the Secularization of American Psychology,” by Russell D. Kosits (History of Psychology, 2004,
Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 340 –366), contained two errors.
On p. 358, the ﬁrst paragraph should read “Given this theological background, it is now
possible to consider the New Psychology’s Fallacy argument as deeply ironic and even
tragic, particularly for William James, the argument’s most inﬂuential articulator.”
On p. 342, footnote 5, 6th line of the quotation, the word to should not be crossed out.

