The Construction of Charles Babbage’s
Difference Engine No. 2
Doron D. Swade
Charles Babbage designed Difference Engine No. 2 between 1846
and 1848. Contemporary drawings illustrate a machine—never built
during his lifetime—that calculates and tabulates polynomials,
printing results in hard copy and producing stereotype molds for
plates intended for use in conventional printing presses. This article
describes construction of the first complete physical realization of a
full Babbage engine design and outlines Babbage’s ambitions for this
advanced engine.

The failed attempt to construct Difference
Engine No. 1 is perhaps the best known of the
many recounted episodes in Charles Babbage’s
life. Practical attempts to build the machine
were abandoned in March 1833 when, after a
decade of design and development, Joseph
Clement, Babbage’s engineer, downed tools and
fired several of his workers employed on
Babbage’s project following a dispute over compensation.1 While accounts of Difference Engine
No. 1 and its fate have tended to dominate the
literature, it is the Analytical Engine, conceived
by 1834, to which Babbage largely owes his reputation as the “first computer pioneer.”2 His later
difference engine, Difference Engine No. 2,
designed after the main work on the Analytical
Engine was complete, usually gets no more than
passing mention. The history of the three
machines, however, is intimately connected.

Origins of Difference Engine No. 2
During the dispute with Clement, Babbage
was forcibly distanced from the nuts and bolts
of mechanical construction. Deprived of his
drawings and engine parts, he revisited some of
his early ideas on calculating engines. Using
the “beautiful fragment”—a small section of
the engine assembled by Clement in 1832—as
a physical aid and with drawings back in his
possession in July 1834, Babbage made the
essential transition from calculation to computation—from the mechanized arithmetic of
the Difference Engine to programmable general-purpose computation the principles of
which he embodied in the designs for the
Analytical Engine.3
The designs for the Analytical Engine incorporate most of the essential logical features
commonly found in a present-day general-pur-

70

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

pose digital computer.4 These include programmability (Babbage used punched cards), an
internal repertoire of automatically executable
arithmetical functions (direct multiplication,
division, addition, and subtraction) and a range
of system and circuit functions including microprogramming, pipelining, iteration or looping,
conditional branching, and parallel processing.
A further feature of the design is the engine’s
internal architecture that separates the “memory” he from the “processor.” Using descriptions borrowed from the textile industry,
Babbage called the memory “the store,” and the
processor “the mill.” The separation of store
and mill foreshadowed von Neumann’s scheme
that has dominated computer architectures in
the electronic era. The designs do not feature
facilities for internally storing programs:
Instruction sequences as well as data were held
externally on fanfold, pasteboard punched
cards and input from mechanical card readers.
It is important to note that Babbage nowhere
used the terminology invoked here to describe
logical features. The use of terms such as program, microprogram, pipelining, iterative looping, conditional branching, and processing is a
backward projection from the modern computer
age and is fraught with the known historiographic hazards of anachronical interpretation—
views of the past that do not take account of the
alteration of perceptions with time.
In 1846, with the major work on the
Analytical Engine design done, Babbage began
to design a new machine, Difference Engine
No. 25 (see the sidebar, “Babbage’s Difference
Engine No. 2: Overview,” for additional information). Though concerted work on the new
engine dates from 1847, there is evidence that
Babbage had been actively mindful of the

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

1058-6180/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: Overview
Difference Engine No. 2 was designed between 1846
and 1848. The built machine weighs 5 metric tons and
consists of 8,000 parts equally divided between the printing and stereotyping apparatus, and the calculating section (see Figure 5 in the main text). The side view of the
machine (Figure 4 in the main text) is one of the main
drawings in the original set of 20, and one that is most
evocative of its overall shape. The drawing shows a
machine 11 feet long and 7 feet high with the depth varying between 18 inches and 4 feet. The three main sections
of the machine are the control mechanism alongside the
crank handle on the right, the calculating section consisting of eight vertical column assemblies located in the central rectangle, and the printing and stereotyping
apparatus, on the left.
The engine is operated by turning the crank handle.
The handle drives, via bevel gears, a set of cams arranged
in a vertical stack. There are 14 pairs of conjugate cams—
that is, each of 14 cams has a companion cam the profile
of which is a geometric inversion of its mate. This paired
arrangement provides positive bidirectional drive: Shafts
and columns are lifted and positively driven downward
rather than relying on gravity. The 28 cams control the lifting, turning, and sliding motions required to execute the
repeated additions for the method of finite differences. The
crank handle also drives the printer and stereotype apparatus from a long shaft that runs the length of the underside of the machine and which is driven by a large bevel
gear on the underside of the cam stack.
Numbers are stored and operated on using figure
wheels engraved with the decimal numbers zero through
nine (Figure A). Each digit value in a multidigit number is
represented by a separate figure wheel. Negative values
are represented by complements. Numbers are stored and
operated on in columns of figure wheels with units at the
bottom, tens next above, hundreds next above, and so on.
The machine has eight columns, or axes, each with 31
figure wheels, one column for each of seven differences,
and a column for the tabular result. The tabular value
appears on the leftmost figure wheel column in Figure 4
in the main text, the first difference column is next and so
on. The seventh difference column is on the extreme right.
The engine automatically calculates and tabulates any
seventh-order polynomial to 31 decimal places using the
method of finite differences, prints the result to 30 places
on a paper roll, and impresses the same results on soft
material to produce stereotype molds from which printing
plates can be made. Initial values are set by hand from a
precalculated table by rotating the figure wheels after disabling the security mechanisms.

Difference Engine during the design of the
Analytical Engine. A drawing dating from as
early as March 1842, for example, shows an
improved version of the successive carriage

Typically, when finite differences are used as a manual
technique, one adds the higher order difference to the next
lower order difference in a fixed series of separate additions.
Mapped onto the engine, this requires adding the constant
difference on the seventh difference column to the sixth
difference column, the sixth difference to the fifth difference, and so on. However, instead of stepwise repeated
serial addition of this kind, Babbage split the addition cycle
into two. During the first half-cycle, the values on the odd
difference columns are added to the adjacent even difference columns, and in the second half-cycle the even differences are added to the odd differences. Provided the
initial setup values are offset appropriately, this pipelining
arrangement has the same effect as adding differences in a
sequence of seven separate additions. The advantage of the
half-cycle arrangement is a shortened calculating cycle,
more efficient use of hardware, and a fixed cycle time that
is independent of the number of differences.1
For a seventh-order polynomial, the machine executes
seven 31-digit decimal additions each calculating cycle to
produce each next value in the table. Each new tabular
value is automatically transferred to the output apparatus
for printing and stereotyping. For polynomials of order less
than seven, the higher-order difference columns are set to
zero and play no part. The engine, eased through use, produces one result every six seconds.

References and notes
1. D. Swade, Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2:
Technical Description, Science Museum Papers in the
History of Technology, Science Museum, 1996, pp. 66-67.

Figure A. Figure wheel. One of 248 similar wheels. The
outer nibs warn the tens carriage mechanism. If a figure
wheel exceeds 9, a carry is required to the next decade. As
the wheel passes from 9 through to 0, the outer nib
latches a device that warns that a carry is still required.
(Photo courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

mechanism first used in Difference Engine No.
1.6 The timing of Babbage’s preoccupation with
a new difference engine is confirmed by his
later recollection:

July–September 2005

71

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

About twenty years after I had commenced the
first Difference Engine, and after the greater part
of these drawings had been completed, I found
that almost every contrivance in it had been
superseded by new and more simple mechanism,
which the construction of the Analytical Engine
had rendered necessary.7

Babbage was consistent in his portrayal of
the Analytical Engine’s influence on an
improved difference engine design. In 1864 he
again recalled:
… in labouring to perfect this Analytical
Machine of greater power and wider range of
computation, I have discovered the means of
simplifying and expediting the mechanical
process of the first Difference Engine.8

As a design challenge, the functions of the
Analytical Engine were vastly more demanding
than those for the earlier machine. The mechanisms for direct multiplication and division,
for example, required intricacy and complexity well beyond those for the repeated additions
in the Difference Engine.
Babbage’s near obsession with minimizing
the execution time of all arithmetical functions
led him to devise more-efficient techniques for
simple addition, not least to make room in the
timing cycle for multiplication and division that
were irreducibly more time-consuming, relying
as they did on sequences of repeated operations.
The anticipating carriage mechanism, for example—which was devised as a time-saving
improvement to the mechanism used in the earlier Difference Engine—he extravagantly ranked
as “the most important part of the Analytical
Engine.”9 The technique allowed all the tens carries in a number to be executed at the same
time, rather than serially as in his earlier design.
The anticipating carriage mechanism is one
example of many in which the demands of the
Analytical Engine raised Babbage’s design capabilities to new levels of sophistication, economy,
and elegance. Though he did not use the anticipating carriage technique in Difference Engine
No. 2, Babbage is explicit about the influence on
its design of his work on the Analytical Engine.
He wrote that, for his new difference engine, he
“proposed to take advantage of all the improvements and simplifications which years of
unwearied study had produced for the
Analytical Engine.”10 This was no false claim.
Difference Engine No. 2 uses roughly three times
fewer parts (8,000 compared to 25,000) for a
similar calculating capacity.
There is a further direct and intimate con-

72

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

nection between Difference Engine No. 2 and
the Analytical Engine: The two machines share
the same plans for the stereotyping apparatus.11
The designs for Difference Engine No. 2
were offered to the government in 1852 in a
letter to the prime minister, Lord Derby. In
offering an improved machine, it seems that
Babbage was concerned to discharge some
residual discomfort at the failure to complete
Difference Engine No. 1. Babbage wrote:
I feel, in laying this representation before your
Lordship, and in making the offer I now make,
that I have discharged to the utmost limit every
implied obligation I originally contracted with
the country.12

The offer to the government was rebuffed,
and Babbage retreated yet again into a series of
bitter grievances. No attempt was made to construct the machine in Babbage’s lifetime. The
plans remained on the drawing board for 140
years—until metal was first cut for an experimental trial piece in December 1986.13

Sources and interpretation
The set of drawings for Difference Engine No.
2 consists of 20 main views, several derivative
tracings, and technical descriptions expressed in
Babbage’s Mechanical Notation—an elaborate
idiosyncratic system of signs and symbols that
served as an abstract descriptive language he
developed as a design aid.14 The drawings and
notations make no concessions to anyone seeking to understand the machine from scratch.
Apart from the drawings and notations there is
practically no introductory material, guiding
explanation, textual description, or clues to the
logic or rationale for the designs. The material
cited represents a free-standing source from
which his intentions had to be decoded.
The drawings for Difference Engine No. 2
are the most complete set that Babbage produced. There is no evidence that any are missing, and since no attempt was made to
construct the machine, the set of drawings was
never split up for the execution of separate
tasks or exposed to the hazards of dirt and damage in a workshop environment. They were
also spared the revisions and improvements to
which Babbage subjected most of his other
designs, often leaving the machines imperfectly specified or in transitional states of incompleteness. It seems that, for once, Babbage was
content to leave well enough alone.
The original drawings and notations represent
the principal contemporary data source for the
construction of the machine. However, the small

team at the Science Museum was fortunate not to
have to start from scratch in its attempts to
understand the functions of the mechanisms.
Bromley, Australian computer scientist and historian, had, as Visiting Research Fellow, studied
the technical archive of Babbage’s drawings held
in the Science Museum Library, London, during
a series of short sabbaticals from the University of
Sydney starting in 1979. As part of a larger analysis of Babbage’s calculating engines, Bromley had
decoded the drawings for Difference Engine No.
2, arrived at an understanding of the overall
design, general layout and operation of the
machine’s basic elements, and produced a short
draft summary for an unpublished book chapter
that described the machine’s essential features.15
At that time, Bromley’s paper was the only written description of the engine.16 It was the authority of Bromley’s detailed work on this and other
of Babbage’s engine designs, and his conviction
that the drawings represented the design of a
viable working machine, that gave credibility to
the undertaking to construct it.
The original sources are sufficiently detailed
to describe the shape and nominal size of individual parts, their physical interrelationship,
and, through interpretation, their intended
function. However, for all their richness, the
drawings are not sufficiently detailed to serve
as a specification for manufacture: No information is provided as to choice of materials,
methods of manufacture, order of assembly,
lubrication, precision, or finish.
The drawings are deficient in other respects.
There are dimensioning inconsistencies where
the same parts are shown differently sized in different views; layout errors; and there are incompletenesses in the design (omitting any detail for
driving the inking rollers, or for advancing the
stereotype trays, for example).17 As well as
instances of omitted mechanisms, there are
redundant assemblies. For example, a complete
carriage axis is shown for the highest difference
column (the seventh difference), which, being
the last, performs no function at all: Once set
with an initial value, none of the associated figure wheels can exceed 10 in ordinary operation.
The drawings contain other errors, one of which
(in the mechanism for the carriage of tens) is
fatal to the correct operation of the engine.
Although this litany of deficiencies sounds
damning, none of them compromises the
validity of the basic logic, design principles, or
intended function of the machine. Babbage
made no attempt to construct the engine, and
the deficiencies in the specification for the
most part represent the gap between an
advanced design—arrested in an incomplete

state of engineering development—and a working machine. The gap, in short, is one of engineering completeness rather than of logical or
operational principle.

The trial piece
The proposal to construct Difference Engine
No. 2 was made by Bromley in May 1985 during one of his sabbatical visits from Sydney. I
had recently been appointed curator of computing at the Science Museum, and Bromley
appeared on my doorstep to introduce himself
to the new incumbent.
The timing of Bromley’s arrival was uncanny. Part of my curatorial responsibilities included care of the defining set of surviving
mechanical assemblies of Babbage’s machines.
I was aware that almost every published
account of Babbage’s efforts attributed his failure to the limitations of 19th-century mechanical engineering. I was both perplexed and
incredulous that, with advances in manufacturing, no one had attempted to realize any of
his designs once the supposed limitations of his
time had been removed. Nagging historical
questions had troubled Babbage scholars—did
the complex circumstances of Babbage’s failures mask the technical or logical impossibility of his machines? Had the machine been
built, would it have worked? Was Babbage an
impractical dreamer or a designer of the highest caliber? Here was Bromley, with an ambitious scheme that might advance the debate.
Part of the motivational landscape was a serious historical agenda.
Bromley explained in a covering letter to
Dame Margaret Weston, director of the Science
Museum, that he was convinced from his studies that the drawings represented a viable
design for a working machine, and that building a working engine would have historical
value beyond simply proving the viability of
this particular design. He wrote that
Construction of the Difference Engine No. 2
would not only confirm the soundness of
Babbage’s logical and mechanical design principles in this case but would also lend conviction
to the entire range of his designs for automatic
computing engines.18

The proposal concluded with the suggestion
that the complete engine would memorialize
Babbage as the first pioneer of the computer.
He wrote
The completed Difference Engine No. 2 would
stand as a tribute to the forefather of the modern

July–September 2005

73

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

Figure 1. Trial piece, 1989. Adds a two-digit decimal number to a threedigit number and takes account of the tens carriage. (Photo courtesy
of the Science Museum, London.)

computer and one of the most ingenious mechanicians of the nineteenth century. It should be
finished in time for the 200th anniversary of
Babbage’s birth on 26 December 1991.18

The proposal made no mention of funding,
management, or manufacturing capacity.
The upshot of the proposal was approval to
construct a small section of the engine as a test
piece. The trial piece was a critical staging post
in the construction of the engine.19 It would
allow verification of the basic arithmetical
mechanism and exploration of a variety of
technical concerns. I was also aware of the
strategic value of a working trial piece to promote the project and as a fund-raising aid.
The trial piece added a two-digit number to
a three-digit number with the result correct to
three digits. The full engine is automatic in that
the lifting and turning motions necessary for
the repeated additions are executed automatically by an internal control system driven by
turning the crank handle. The trial piece did
not have the benefit of this complex drive
mechanism. Instead, it was operated manually: The dozen or so separate operations
involved in the nondestructive addition of two
numbers were executed by manually lifting
and turning knobs, catches, and sliders in the
prescribed sequence to add, restore, and carry,
and also to perform the locking operations that
secured the mechanism from derangement at
different points in the cycle (see Figure 1).
The original timetable allowed for one year
to complete the trial piece. Ultimately, for

74

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

cumulatively mundane reasons, it took four.
The trial piece had a false start. The designs prepared hastily during a short visit from Bromley
in January 1986 were incomplete at the time of
his return to Sydney to meet university commitments. Though Bromley had spotted the
design error in the original drawings, in the
rushed circumstances of January 1986 he had
not attempted a solution.
In July 1987, the project was joined part
time by Peter Turvey, a member of the curatorial staff in the museum’s engineering department, and a weekend marine engineering
hobbyist. His brief was to coordinate the production of the trial piece.
After a desultory attempt by the Science
Museum’s workshops to use the incomplete
drawings, this first attempt was scrapped in
October 1987. For the second attempt, I contracted out the design drawings to Rhoden
Partners Ltd., a small UK engineering design
company that had, in the 1950s, been commissioned to produce replicas of Babbage’s
engines for IBM, and now specialized in designing and building one-off prototypes for the
manufacturing industry. Rhoden was conveniently situated in Acton, West London, a few
miles away from the Science Museum. The first
meeting with Rhoden took place in January
1988. We were starting from scratch two years
after the start of the first attempt.
Reg Crick was the Rhoden engineer assigned
to the project. Crick, close to 60 at the time, was
a seasoned mechanical design engineer. He had
philosophically survived the professional insecurities of life in engineering design—the
sudden scrapping of projects, the financial vicissitudes of companies in engineering development, and the roughhouse of commercial
imperatives. He was modest and methodical,
with an inventive flair more often associated
with more overtly volatile temperaments. Crick
played a critically important role in the construction project. The team I now had consisted
of Crick, Turvey (part time), and, when needed,
occasional remote consultation by telex to
Bromley, 11,000 miles away in Australia.
As mentioned, there is a flaw in the carriage
mechanism as depicted by Babbage. Figure 2
shows the layout of the cluster of axes around
each figure wheel column. The layout is righthanded and is the same for both the odd and
even difference columns as is clearly indicated
in several plan views. As drawn, there is a conflict between two functions: If the figure wheels
rotate in the correct direction to add, then the
associated warning mechanism for the carriage
of tens fouls and jams. The principle of the

mechanism is valid, but the layout as depicted
in the drawings is unworkable. Bromley had
spotted the problem in his original analysis and
had offered several solutions.15
The solution we chose as the one most likely
to have been adopted by Babbage was to make a
mirror image of the carriage mechanism for
alternate axes. Crick found that using oppositehanded parts had unforeseen consequences:
The new arrangement involved small but critical alterations to the angular positioning of end
stops and locks, and this adjustment would
have to be carried through the whole specification for each of the eight axes. The new arrangement also involved a reversal of the direction of
rotation for certain circular motions.
New fully specified drawings for the trial
piece were available in March 1988; the mirrored configuration used in the trial piece, and
adopted in the full engine, is shown in Figure
3. Testing the mirror configuration became the
main purpose of the trial piece. Issues of clearances, tolerances, wear and tear, gear tooth profile, choice of materials, and torque that had so
preoccupied us took a back seat.
The trial piece was built in the Science
Museum workshops and completed in February
1989, three years behind schedule. Exquisitely
made, bright, shiny, and elegantly complex, it
was an immediate hit (see Figure 1). It attracted media coverage and, as we hoped, impressed
trustees and sponsors. The trial piece proved
conclusively that the modifications to implement the mirror-imaged solution to the design
flaw worked and would
serve as a sound technique
on which to base the full
construction. It also served
as a pedagogic aid to
demonstrate the essential
arithmetical
function.
What was unexpected was
the role it played in visualizing the working of the
machine during the design
and the preparation of full
drawings.

tal question of authenticity. If the engine was
built as drawn, then we had no expectation that
it would work. The final object, if achieved,
would be an intriguing piece of Victorian sculpture but one that would prove nothing about
the essential viability of Babbage’s schemes. If,
on the other hand, the original designs were
modified, in what sense could a working engine

Figure 2. Design drawing. Addition and carriage mechanism
(Science Museum Library Babbage Papers, drawing BAB [A]
171 part, “Difference Engine No. 2. Addition Carriage and
mode of Driving the Axes,” undated). This original layout by
Babbage has a design flaw. (Drawing courtesy of the Science
Museum, London.)

Authenticity
The flaw in the layout
of the carriage mechanism
was the most significant
and potentially damaging
of the errors we identified.
Modifying the design in
any way at all presented a
basic curatorial dilemma
and raised the fundamen-

Figure 3. Design drawing. Addition and carriage mechanism with mirror-imaged solution to
the design flaw, 1991. (Drawing courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

July–September 2005

75

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

claim to be a vindication of Babbage’s work?
The way out of the impasse was the realization that it was a mistake to view Babbage’s
design as sacrosanct and unimpeachably perfect. Building the engine was not the slavish
physical implementation of an abstract ideal
with doom attending even the smallest deviation from the master’s instructions. The project
was more in the nature of a resumption of a
practical engineering project that had been
arrested in 1848. Had Babbage proceeded from
design to manufacture, the deficiencies in the
drawings would have become evident. There
would have been no way of avoiding them,
and he would have sought solutions. We were
simply picking up where he left off, and the
task for us was to find solutions with conscientious regard for contemporary practice while
using the best knowledge available of Babbage’s
style of working. We approached each new
need with the question, What would Babbage
have done? and proceeded to seek historically
sensitive solutions.
The issue of authenticity was a central concern. I was determined that nothing would compromise the value of the construction in drawing
historically meaningful conclusions about
Babbage’s world. We would need to be able to
robustly resist the charge that “Yes, you built the
engine, but Babbage could not have.” Credible
defense against this charge provided the ruling
principle for all issues of authenticity. For each
design modification, we first sought solutions
that Babbage had used elsewhere in his designs;
we only resorted to fresh thinking once this
quest was exhausted. A second principle was that
of reversibility, that is, to incorporate the facility
for demounting any added assembly or modification so as to restore the machine to the state
depicted by Babbage in the original drawings.
The manufacture of parts for the full
machine was beyond the capacity of the
Science Museum’s in-house workshops and was
contracted out. Further, the manufacturing and
build costs were beyond anything the Science
Museum could reasonably fund from its everdiminishing Grant-in-Aid from the government. Sponsorship was the only solution. We
needed fully detailed piece part drawings for
fixed-price quotes to fix the sponsorship target.
In November 1988, the Science Museum
approved funds for the Rhoden engineering
designers to estimate the cost and timescale for
producing fully detailed drawings, tooling, and
materials for a complete machine. At this stage
we downscaled our expectations and abandoned the prospect of building the printing
and stereotyping apparatus for the bicentenni-

76

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

al deadline. I judged that the cost of building
the printer would put the sponsorship target
out of reach, and we were already several years
behind schedule.
Producing detailed specifications raised production issues—choice of materials, methods
of manufacture, precision, finish, typography
for engraving, and lubrication—all issues that
went well beyond those addressed in the manufacture of the small trial piece. To help resolve
historical issues of this kind, the project had
the benefit of Michael Wright, the Science
Museum’s curator of mechanical engineering.
Wright’s knowledge of 19th-century workshop
practice is encyclopedic. The history of tools
and workshops is his profession, his vocation,
and his private passion. Stepping into his private workshop with its period treadle lathes,
oil-stained wooden benches, leather drive belts,
and work in progress is to step into the world
of Babbage and Clement.
Tolerancing and the interchangeability of
parts were critical issues. One of the features of
the engine designs is the repetition of near
identical parts. Babbage did not have available
to him production techniques that offered
inherent repeatability—stamping and pressure
die-casting, for example—and parts were made
one at a time by a combination of machining
and hand fitting. The understanding between
the designer and the machinist, whether specified explicitly on a drawing or not, was that a
part would be made to fit—that is, trimmed
and tweaked by hand at the discretion of the
machinist until it functioned correctly.
Babbage designed the engine at a time when
manufacturing was in transition between craft
and mass production techniques and methods
for manufacturing repeated parts were still
incipient. Until the 1850s there was practically
no standardization in manufacturing. Each
workshop had its own lathes, often custom
built, and the master screw from which screw
threads were cut usually differed from lathe to
lathe even in the same workshop. The notion
of a tolerance, the interval within which the
dimension of a part will fall, is an anachronism—a backward projection from a later age.
With 4,000 parts to make, we abandoned
any wistful notions of recreating a period workshop and building the engine using contemporary 19th-century tools and practices. There was
simply no time. We unashamedly used modern
techniques including computer-controlled
manufacture. But no part was made more precisely than was achievable by Babbage himself,
although possibly by other means. Wright and
Bromley, friends and colleagues before the

engine project began, had taken measurements
from parts of Difference Engine No. 1 and established that Clement was able to make repeated
parts within a tolerance of two-thousandths of
an inch. This became the taboo threshold: An
absolute condition was that repeated parts
would be made to tolerances no finer than this.
The choice of materials for the construction
was resolved through expert advice and inspection of the relics of Babbage’s partial assemblies.
These studies indicated that the use of gunmetal, cast iron, and steel was consistent with
the period. Gunmetal, a form of bronze, was in
common use in Babbage’s day. What we did
not know was whether Babbage would have
tweaked the mix of copper, tin, and zinc by the
addition of other elements such as lead and
phosphorous to achieve particular properties of
durability, workability, brittleness, and sliding
friction. No one on hand seemed to know
much about the state of metallurgical knowledge in the 1840s. To resolve the issue we prevailed on the Department of Materials,
Imperial College, to analyze the composition
of loose parts left over from Babbage’s earlier
works that were in the Museum’s collection. Xray microanalysis showed that the mix was
within an acceptable and recognizable standard, and a close modern match was found.20
Although we now had clear ideas on what
materials Babbage would have used, the original drawings left us in the dark about what
materials would be used for which part.
In January 1990, I assembled an advisory
team and convened a series of blockbuster
meetings. Bromley happened to be in London
en route to Greece to work on the Antikythera
mechanism, the oldest known geared instrument, and was able to join the group. The
posse of curators, historians, and engineers
consisted of Crick, Bromley, Wright, Turvey,
and me. The five of us met for four full days of
marathon consultations sustained only by tea,
coffee, and an occasional gobbled sandwich.
The work was grueling and painstaking, and
the level of detail oppressive. We went through
the drawings for the 4,000 parts and, for each,
debated the material, method of manufacture,
visual and functional authenticity, finish, and
did a final check on precision. By the end of the
last meeting, on 17 January 1990, Crick had
enough information to complete the drawings.

Run-up to the build
With historical issues of specification
resolved, Crick translated Babbage’s 20 main
views into 100 new working drawings that fully
detailed each of the 4,000 parts of the calculat-

ing section of the engine drawn to conform to
modern manufacturing conventions. By now
Crick had the most detailed understanding of
the workings, engineering design, and manufacturing issues of Babbage’s engine. He
designed and drew up the omitted mechanisms, and each went through a curatorial
approval system. For the few instances in
which we were unable to resolve technical
issues from the original drawings, I turned, as
a last resort, to the notations. Traditional drawing boards and drafting pencils were used: The
production of the new drawings was unaided
by CAD technology.
Barrie Holloway, a Rhoden engineer, managed the independent three-party tender
process required by government procurement
policy. Each of three companies quoted for all
4,000 parts, and Holloway undertook the complex process of splitting the order to mix and
match the most economic combinations of
supply. The permutations were nightmarish.
The final figures were available in May 1990.
The cost had gone up from an estimated
£201,000 to £246,000. No one was surprised.
With drawings complete, funding secure,
fixed price quotations in hand, 18 months
until the deadline, and Rhoden Partners on tap,
it looked as though we were in with a chance.
But without warning, Rhoden went bust. The
situation was rescued by prevailing on the
Science Museum to hire Crick and Holloway
immediately. My own role until then had been
that of project director, project and contracts
manager, curator with responsibilities for technical interpretation and authenticity, technical
adjudicator of design options, fundraiser, and
publicist. I would now also have direct line
management for Crick and Holloway and
directly manage the build through to completion including the subcontracted manufacture
of parts to companies specializing in various
processes—milling, pattern making, casting,
gear cutting, spring winding, case hardening,
and so on. Crick and Holloway showed up for
work at the Science Museum on a fixed-term
contract on Friday, 8 June 1990, three days after
they had been fired.

The build
The engine was assembled in full public
view on a prime site on the ground floor of the
Science Museum. An enclosure was built
around the machine (known as the pen) in
which Crick and Holloway, white-coated, slowly assembled the machine. The pen included
two workbenches with engineer’s vises and
basic hand tools for filing, drilling, reaming, fit-

July–September 2005

77

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

Figure 4. Design drawing. Main elevation showing crank handle (right), calculating section (center),
and output apparatus (left). Science Museum Library Babbage Papers, drawing BAB [A] 163, “Elevation
for Difference Engine No. 2.” (Drawing courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

ting, and finishing. These processes were
undertaken in open view. Parts requiring
machining were taken to engineering workshops in the museum’s basement or returned
to the suppliers for modification.
The 4,000 parts were made in six months by
a total of 46 separate specialist subcontractors.
The first deliveries arrived from the contractors
in September 1990, and the 4,000 parts were
supplied in batches over the next six months.
The strategy for the build was not to assemble
the machine in its entirety and then test it in one
dramatic episode.21 This may have been theatrical but ran against proven engineering practice.
The machine was, after all, a prototype. There
were too many unknowns. Instead, the engine
was assembled in small stages, and each stage
tested before we proceeded to the next. Initially,
progress was tentative and exploratory. The
heavy framing pieces that define the engine’s
outline were assembled first, and then, at the
crank handle end, the 28 cams that generate and
orchestrate the sliding, lifting, and turning
motions required for repeated addition were
stacked. The drive trains for lifting and turning
the columns followed next. These trains, located
below the eight sets of vertical axes, consist of
sets of racks and pinions for the circular motions,
and of bell cranks driven by long links for the
vertical motions (see Figure 4). Finally, the eight
figure-wheel columns, the sector wheel columns,
and carriage axes were progressively installed
starting from the crank handle through to the
tabular value at the opposite end (the sidebar,

78

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

“Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: Overview,”
explains the relationship between the columns
and the differences).
In January 1991, with the cam stack and
some of the cam followers assembled, the first
attempt was made to turn the handle. As a precaution against unyielding loads, a four-to-one
reduction gear had been inserted into the manual drive to ease the operator’s task. Despite
this, after a small rotation, the crank handle
would not budge. Analysis showed that the rise
on the cams that controlled the locking action
was too steep to allow rotation, and the cam
follower, which is intended to follow the profile of the cam, could not mount what presented itself as a triangular obstruction and a shock
load that could not be overcome.22 The timing
cycle was too crowded to allow us to ease the
angle to provide a gentler ramp.
Elsewhere in the engine, Babbage had solved
the problem of excessive loads by the use of
counterbalancing springs. The heaviest load is
that presented by the columns of figure wheels,
sector wheels, and their vertical shafts that need
to be lifted and lowered during each calculating
cycle. Babbage provided strong springs at the
top of each vertical shaft. The springs, which are
in compression, support the columns in their
resting position. A single example of this, with
implied duplication, is shown at the top of the
engine on the first difference column (the second column from the left) in Figure 4. Instead
of having to lift, via the drive mechanism, the
full weight of the columns, all that is required

Figure 5. Difference Engine No. 2, on display at the Science Museum, 2005. Eleven feet long and 7 feet
high, the engine weighs 5 metric tons and has 8,000 parts. Main crank handle is at the right; the
calculating section is in the center; and the output apparatus (printer and stereotype mechanisms) are
at the left. (Photo courtesy of the author.)

is a nudge up or down from the equilibrium
position. The forces for these deflections are
small compared to the forces required to lift and
lower the full weight of the assemblies, and the
exertions of the operator are correspondingly
relieved. Using this technique as a model, Crick
devised a mechanism using a strong counterbalancing spring to relieve the load. The mechanism was fixed under the lowest framing piece,
out of sight for normal viewing (see Figure 5).
The phasing of internal actions is critical.
The calculating cycle is crowded with little
margin for deviation from strict synchrony. If
a part moves fractionally late or early, the
mechanism is likely to seize or break as it fouls
a mating part. When parts were first positioned
on the machine, they were rarely in their correct orientation. Each had to be adjusted and
then fixed permanently. The drawings simply
show all gears and rotating parts permanently
pinned to their shafts already in their correct
and final positions. There is no indication of
how the correct positions are to be determined
before pinning. Hundreds of parts were fitted
one at a time by trial and error using grubscrews for incremental adjustment for each
trial. Until all the parts were correctly phased,
the machine would jam incessantly. Breakages,
especially of the brittle bronze carry levers,
which are the most fragile part of the carriage

mechanism, were not uncommon, especially as
the reduction gear in the drive reduced sensitivity to obstructions.
Jamming is an intended feature of error detection built in by Babbage. The engine is a decimal
digital machine. It uses the familiar Arabic number system, and it is digital in the sense that only
discrete integers are legitimate representations of
digit values. So the value represented by a
toothed figure wheel at rest in an intermediate
position between two digit-values is indeterminate, and the occurrence of this state signals that
the integrity of the calculation has been compromised.
What makes Babbage’s designs digital is not
any inherent discreteness in the motions of the
basic logical element (a gear wheel) but the locking and control mechanisms. The most common method used for “digitizing” the motions
occurs in the form of a wedge that is driven
between teeth of the gears at various points in
the cycle. The wedge has three functions:
• Locking. When inserted between two teeth,
the wedge locks the wheel and prevents
derangement except during specific predetermined windows in the timing cycle. The
wedges, which run like sword blades up the
columns and act on all 31 figure wheels at
the same time, are called locks (see Figure 2).

July–September 2005

79

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

• Self-correction. Because of its angled profile,
the insertion of the wedge has a self-correcting action: Small deviations from exactly discrete increments are corrected by the
centering action of the wedge. This action is
analogous to electronic pulse shaping.23
• Error detection. The wedge acts as an error
detector: If a toothed figure wheel has
deranged by more than half the gap
between teeth (2-1/4 degrees), then the
tooth blocks the entry of the lock and causes a jam.24 The crank handle seizes, and the
operator is alerted that the calculation has
been compromised.
The locking mechanisms, unique to
Babbage’s designs, are intended to ensure the
calculation’s absolute integrity. Babbage used a
variety of security mechanisms, one of which
is a device of extraordinary subtlety, the function of which was not fully understood until it
was assembled and operated. The device in
question involved horn-like attachments in the
carriage mechanism (see Figure 2). In accordance with Babbage’s intentions, these were
carried through to the new drawings, although
their function was not fully evident at the time.
In live operation, it became clear that the horns
are a security measure that prevents the figure
wheels from deranging while waiting for a possible carry from below. The device prevents the
wheel from incrementing unless driven from
the legitimate source at a particular point in the
cycle. Babbage went to great lengths to make
good his assertion that his machines break,
jam, or operate as intended, that is to say, they
would never deceive.25
One of the greatest difficulties in the commissioning stages of the engine resulted from
the absence of any provision for debugging.
When the machine jammed, there was no provision for easily isolating one section from
another to help localize the fault. The whole
machine, including the printing and stereotype
apparatus, is one monolithic “hard wired” unit.
Drive gears and levers are pinned to their
shafts. Drive rods and links are shown in the
original drawings as pinned or riveted and
therefore difficult to dismantle once assembled.
In the event of a jam, all one could do was poke
around with a screwdriver, or in extreme cases
a crow bar, prying here and there for some give
or play that would indicate that the jam
occurred earlier in the machine. The hunt-andpeck technique was repeated until a moving
part was found with no play, and the first
occurrence of this was inspected as the possible
source of the jam. During assembly and com-

80

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

missioning, the machine jammed countless
times each day. When the machine was locked
solidly, the starting point for fault detection
was haphazard and demoralizing.
Our first attempt to set up the machine to
perform its first calculation took place on 23
June 1991, four days before the exhibition
opening. In anticipation, I had calculated the
initial setting up values for a table of powers of
seven, the first test calculation we would try,
using a CP/M version of a Microsoft spreadsheet, package, Multiplan, running on a North
Star Horizon computer I had bought back in
the US in 1979. I also produced a printout of
the first 80 values of the function y = x7 the first
test calculation we would try. In the first trial
we found that the setup procedure described by
Babbage was self-corrupting. The odd and even
axes are set up at different parts of the cycle,
and advancing the machine to the second
setup point deranged the settings already
made. The solution was simple enough: to provide temporary locks (vertical metal strips with
slotted fixing holes) that could be slid in and
out and fixed in the engaged or unengaged
position using knurled nuts. The self-corrupting sequence is an illustration of the earlier
assertion that although the deficiencies in the
original design were many and varied, none
were issues of basic logic that compromised
Babbage’s original intentions—that is, modifications were issues of engineering implementation rather than of principle.
Fitting and assembly started in September
1990, and the calculating section was fully
assembled by late June 1991. At the time the
machine went on exhibition on 27 June 1991,
it was still plagued by jams. At the gala opening, the engine was demonstrated to international media with all figure wheels set to zero.
This prevented jams and allowed the visually
arresting spectacle of the rotating helices of the
carriage mechanism to be shown. The sight of
the rippling helices distracted the press from
the historically inconclusive state of progress,
and media coverage was uniformly positive.
Commissioning and debugging continued
in the intervals between twice-daily public
demonstrations but without the protection of
our enclosed pen. The sources of the jams were
progressively eliminated, and, with use, the initial stiffness began to ease. The path to reliable
working was a gradual process of eliminating
more refined forms of minor fault.
The final adjustments were to some of the
carriage mechanisms. Babbage had insisted on
the highest precision achievable at the time as
a uniform standard. Michael Lindgren, for one,

has argued that the lessons of the Scheutz difference engines, the first of which was finished
in 1843, are that such precision was not only
unnecessary but that the consequent costs and
delays contributed to Babbage’s failure.26 We
had thought that by using computer-controlled
manufacture, repeated parts, would be sufficiently similar to be interchangeable. This
proved not to be the case. The most delicate
parts are the bronze carry levers which, because
of their intricacy, were made in two parts soldered together in a jig. We found that some 10
percent of the 210 carry levers required final
adjustment by hand (through trial and error)
using a specially made tool to bend the arms.
The engine performed its first full automatic error-free tabulation of the function y = x7 on
29 November 1991, 27 days before Babbage’s
200th birthday. Though the final adjustments
were finicky, the machine, once pinned and
adjusted, has been, from the time of its first correct calculation, robustly and persistently reliable. Almost without exception, calculation
errors have been traced to an earlier human
setup or operational error.
Each new tabular result requires seven 31digit decimal additions. At first the engine calculated at a rate of one result (seven 31-digit
additions) every 10 seconds. As the machine
eased with use, the rate speeded up to one
result every 6 seconds.

Output apparatus—Funding and
preparation
The automatic production of a machinereplicable record of results is an integral part of
the conception of the engine. The output apparatus that prints and stereotypes results is
described in the original set of drawings to the
same level of detail as the calculating section.
The operation of this compound output apparatus is described in the sidebar, “Difference
Engine No. 2: Printing and Stereotyping.”
The unique circumstances of the bicentenary provided a hard deadline as well as leverage to raise sponsorship through the benefit by
association with a high-profile project. This had
now passed. There was now no deadline and
no public event on the back of which to attract
corporate support.
The funding breakthrough came, indirectly,
through Bill Gates. The European press launch
of his book The Road Ahead was held in the
Science Museum on 3 December 1995, and the
photo opportunity was to be the spectacle of
Gates turning the engine’s handle. When he
arrived at the museum, I gave Gates preliminary guidance on the turning technique while

a rabid pack of some 40 paparazzi, corralled
into a small area behind the engine, shouted
his name to pop a shot as Gates turned in reflex
to the caller. The atmosphere was aggressive
and threatening, and Gates appeared discomfited by the assault. The confusion and noise of
the situation prevented me from making a
pitch, but a member of Gates’s party, Jonathan
Lazarus, trailed behind and was interested in a
source of Enigma machines. I took his card and
we exchanged emails, in one of which I asked
what Gates had thought of the machine.
Lazarus relayed to me that Gates had thought
that the “machine was ‘very cool’ and that he
had been pleased to see it.”
I sought Lazarus’s advice about any potential interest Gates or Microsoft might have in
sponsoring the printer construction and
emailed a project description. He referred me
to Nathan Myhrvold, group vice president of
applications and content, at Microsoft. What
followed was a year-long email courtship with
Myhrvold, aided by a visit and a demonstration, on 13 March 1997, of the completed section of the machine. He followed up shortly
after with a proposal to personally fund the
construction of two printers and another
engine. The first printer would complete the
Science Museum’s existing machine; the second printer–engine pair would be a replica of
the whole engine for display, and occasional
use, in Myhrvold’s house in Seattle. When I
told Reg Crick, the now-retired engineer who
had played a key role in constructing the calculating section, all he said, with what I hope
was an audible smile, was “What took you so
long?”
Orders for parts were dispatched in October
1998. Crick came out of retirement and assembly work in the gallery started late in 1999.
Assembling Babbage’s machines is a two-person
task, and Holloway had long since left. I had a
young, well-qualified in-house conservator–
machinist and engineering workshop enthusiast,
Richard Horton, assigned to Crick for the build.
He was to be Crick’s “apprentice” and was being
groomed for the future.

Building the printing and stereotype
apparatus
The output apparatus was built in public
view directly onto the already completed calculating section of the engine. Building the
apparatus was substantially more difficult,
troublesome, and frustrating than building the
calculating section. We originally estimated
that it would take a year to assemble. It took
well over double this time. The single biggest

July–September 2005

81

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

Difference Engine No. 2: Printing and Stereotyping
printing plates for use in a conventional printing press.
Figure B shows a plan view.
The printing and stereotyping apparatus is directly coupled to the calculating section, and each new 30-digit tabular value is transferred automatically from the results
column, via a system of racks, pinions, and spindles, to the
print wheels. The tabular result is transferred at the same
time to two sets of punches for stereotyping (see Figures C
and D). Typesetting is automatic, and each result is printed
and stereotyped during the calculating cycle in which it is
generated: There is no buffering or storage of the result and
there is no time overhead to print—that is, printing and
stereotyping is accommodated in the calculating cycle and
takes no additional time. Each cycle leaves an inked impression of a 30-digit result on the paper print roll that advances
automatically to provide
fresh paper for each line
(see Figure 7 in the main
text and Figure E). This
hardcopy printout is
intended as a record and
checking copy only; the
operator cannot alter the
line spacing and format.
The production of multiple
copies for distribution is
achieved through stereotyping.
There are two sets of
stereotype punches, one
with a larger, and one with
a smaller font. Each set
consists of 30 wheels, one
for each digit of the result,
with hardened steel number punches fixed at the
circumference (see Figure
D). The wheels making up
the punches have 2
degrees of freedom only:
Figure B. Plan of output apparatus. Science Museum Library Babbage Papers, drawing
rotational (to register each
BAB [A] 173, “Plan of Inking Printing & Stereotype Apparatus,” undated. (Drawing
digit of the result), and vercourtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

A central feature of Babbage’s calculating engine
designs is the automatic capture of machine-replicable
output. Difference Engine No. 2 features an output apparatus that automatically typesets, prints, and stereotypes
results. The apparatus is shown on the left-hand side of
Figure 4 in the main text. The upper section contains the
print wheels, inking apparatus, and paper roll for hardcopy, as well as the stereotype wheel punches. The lower
section is a movable platform that positions the stereotyping trays under the stereotype punches for each new
result. The whole apparatus, which is bolted to the main
framing, consists of some 4,000 parts and weighs and estimated 2.5 metric tons. As an ensemble, the two units produce one-off inked hardcopy results to 30 digits on a print
roll as well as a stereotype mold for the production of

difference between the two sections of the
machine is that, although there is a large number of repeated parts and assemblies in the calculating section, there is very little repetition
in the output apparatus. The learning curve
throughout the fitting and assembly stayed relatively flat.
Like the calculating section, Babbage drew
the output apparatus as a single monolithic
“hard wired” assembly with no provision for

82

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

adjustments. Unlike the calculating section, the
output apparatus is dense and deep with poor
access to its internal workings. Any small adjustment or fitting required lifting out the whole 2.5
metric ton assembly to enable access. Each trialand-error adjustment meant countless separate
cycles of removal and refixing. A large overhead
gantry was mounted permanently to lift out the
apparatus, sometimes several times a day.
Inevitably, there were modifications to the

Figure C. Output apparatus (computer simulation)
showing figure wheels (top right), printing apparatus
(left), and stereotyping punches and trays (bottom).
(Photo courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

tical (lowering to impress the result, and raising to return to
receive the next result). The wheel punches are assembled
on the same shaft and are lowered and raised together as a
set. Below each set of punches is a bronze tray to take the
soft material to receive the impression (see Figure C).
During each calculating cycle, the punches are driven
downward into the trays below, and the material is
impressed with all 30 digits at the same time in one action.
After each impression, the tray advances automatically and
repositions itself to receive the next result on a new line or
column and the distance between the impressions (the line
height) is determined by the incremental advance of the tray.
The smaller tray advances by a proportionately smaller
amount to give a reduced line height in keeping with the
smaller font size. The platform or carriage supporting the
stereotype trays has 2 horizontal degrees of freedom, which
allow the trays to advance down the page (line to line) or
across the page (column to column). The carriage is driven
by falling weights that are rewound automatically at the end
of a column or page. The layout of results can be programmed by the operator by selecting from a menu of pattern wheels, which control the incremental behavior of the
moving platform. Programmable formatting features include
line height, number of columns, margin widths, number of
lines on a page, blank lines between groups of lines, and the

designs. Some were precautionary. Others were
in response to problems that arose during commissioning. Precautionary measures included
the provision of counterbalancing weights to
relieve the deadweight of the 30 vertical racks
forming part of the drive train that transfers the
tabular value from the last column to the print
wheels. Another precaution was the provision
of robust support brackets and legs to relieve
the load on the bolts that fix the whole appa-

Figure D. Stereotyping wheel punches for large font.
(Photo courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

Figure E. Printing mechanism showing inking rollers and
ink bath (top), and paper drums in raised position taking
an inked impression from the print wheels. (Photo
courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

ability to have results progress line to line with automatic column wrap, or column to column with automatic line wrap.
A feedback mechanism from the output apparatus to
the calculating section automatically halts the machine at
the end of a stereotyped page to prevent an overrun. This
ensures that the first new result on the fresh tray is the next
result in the sequence and that no results are lost in the
changeover.

ratus to the engine frame. Such measures were
reversible and unproblematic.
Some modifications were introduced in
response to operational difficulties during commissioning. There is, for example, no way of
uncoupling the drive to the output apparatus
from the calculating section: The drive is provided by a single unbroken shaft that runs the
full length of the underside of the engine and
is directly driven by a large bevel gear under the

July–September 2005

83

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

Figure 6. Difference Engine No. 2, 2002. Foreground: Printing and
stereotyping apparatus. Rear: Calculating section and drive. (Photo
courtesy of the Science Museum, London.

cam stack (see Figure 4). So to run the printer,
you need to run the engine. This is not practical either during commissioning and testing, or
when using the machine for tabulation. With
no provision for uncoupling, working on the
output apparatus required two people, one at
the crank handle, the other at the output end
11 feet away. This, too, was impractical:
Countless adjustments, visual inspections, and
tests requiring incremental operation would be
inconvenient or impossible to perform with
two operators, one unsighted, stranded at the
crank end. There was also the frequent need to
work on the two units separately, and debugging was easier if the units could be uncoupled.
A more serious problem would arise when
using the machine for tabulation. In some situations, the output apparatus needs to be cycled
without disturbing the engine. Priming the inking rollers by cycling the printing system is one
such need. Advancing the stereotype trays so
that they can be removed, refilled, or replaced is
another. Both these operations may be required
during a calculation run. However, without the
facility for uncoupling, the only way to cycle the
output apparatus was to cycle the engine, and
doing so alters its internal state and destroys the

84

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

continuity of the calculation run.
The solution was to sever the main drive
shaft to the output apparatus and insert a
clutch that could couple or break the drive as
needed. Crick designed the clutch with manual interlocks so that the drive can be recoupled if and only if the output apparatus and
the calculating section are correctly phased.
A crank handle, a duplicate of the handle
specified by Babbage, was provided at the
printer end so that the output apparatus
could be driven directly without affecting the
calculation section. (See the left-hand side of
Figures 5 and 6).
One intriguing additional device was a
“bounce catcher.” An inking roller swings
downward each calculating cycle to ink the
printing wheels immediately before an impression is taken. At the end of the return swing, it
was found to rebound from its end stop and
foul the paper roller, which was in the upward
swing of its trajectory. With the timing cycle
too tight to separate the actions, Crick designed
a mechanism to trap the roller in its home position on the return swing. In preventing
unwanted oscillations the action of the mechanism is not unlike that—by way of electronic
analogy—of a Schmidt trigger, which latches
the output in a fixed state when a noisy input
signal passes through a reference threshold.
The biggest single difficulty that bedeviled
getting the output apparatus operational was
friction in the drive trains that transfer the
results from the calculating section and the
output apparatus. The main source of this was
sliding friction between 30 vertical racks. The
racks slide against each other, and we found
that surface tension using any form of oil created surprisingly high resistance to sliding. We
tried various forms of wet and dry lubrication
without success. A combination of relieving the
contact surfaces by milling selected shapes in
the faces of the racks, skimming down the
overall width, and using dry graphite lubrication ultimately solved the problem. The stiffness in the train hampered progress almost
until the end and masked several other faults
in the process.
One fundamental design issue threatened to
undermine Babbage’s ambitions for the output
apparatus. The output apparatus automatically
typesets the printed and stereotyped results. In
doing so, the mechanism aligns the appropriate digits on the printing wheels and stereotype
wheel punches for each result. As described earlier, in the calculating section Babbage used
wedge-shaped locks, which have a centering
action that helps to ensure fully digital opera-

tion. The same locking mechanism is used in
several places in the output apparatus. The
question that remained unanswered until last
was whether the action of the wedge-shaped
locks would be sufficient to align the stereotyping punches accurately enough—that is, to
the analog standards of exactness for a typographically acceptable result.
The first clue that the wedge-shaped locking
system might not be adequate was the imperfect alignment of the experimental inked
paper-roll hardcopy output (see Figure 7).
Examination revealed that the forces with
which the locks operated were not sufficient to
align the stereotype punches, and this had
been masked by the stiffness in the vertical
racks. Crick devised a collapsed link mechanism that drove one of the existing locks home
with sufficient force to align the punches to an
acceptable standard.
The various intended features of the output
apparatus were exercised for the first time in
March 2002. Although refinements to the inking apparatus were made subsequently, this
date marks the completion of the machine, as
originally designed.
The project to construct the engine started
with Bromley’s proposal in May 1985. It took just
under 17 years to realize an operational machine.

Lessons
It is legitimate to ask what was learned from
this project, and what was learned that could
not otherwise be learned. The machine was
built to tolerances achievable by Babbage, using
materials available to him, and introducing
reversible modifications to the design using
solutions used by Babbage elsewhere. Despite
many modifications, no flaws were found that
compromised the design’s essential logic or
principles. Given that the machine works, and
was built with conscientious attention to issues
of authenticity, the project provided definitive
answers to some of the earlier historical questions about Babbage’s standing. It is fair to conclude that had Babbage built the machine, it
would have worked. Second, the fact of its
working vindicates Babbage as a designer of
extraordinary practical inventiveness, this in
addition to the already recognized intellectual
accomplishments of his designs for computing
engines. So we can demonstrably say that
Babbage was not an impractical dreamer but a
designer of the highest caliber. These assertions
could not be made with the same conviction
without the empirical confirmation of a working machine.
There were lessons learned that in principle

Figure 7. Experimental printout of a seventh-order polynomial. The
argument is the left-hand three columns. (Photo courtesy of the
Science Museum, London.)

could have been learned without the construction, but were not. The subtle device for locking
the figure wheels during the carriage cycle was
not fully understood until built and operated.
Another contingent finding was the maximum
speed of operation and the limiting factor determining this. We found, after the mechanisms
had eased with use, that the maximum speed of
the machine as designed was 10 results per
minute.27 Also, the limiting consideration was
a gear that gets thrown out of mesh, and this is
probably remediable by a stronger spring.
In principle, one could have analyzed,
inferred, and foreseen these and other features.
But nobody did. Like playing chess, there is a
limit to the number of moves one can foresee,
and the explosion of uncertainties from more
than a few counterfactual conditionals in the
train of reasoning soon sabotages confidence in
any conclusions one might draw. In some
instances, there is no substitute for practice.
Having a physical machine to operate
focused attention on issues of operational procedure, and gave us insights into the implications for contemporary table making. One
insight was into the possibility of suppressing
leading zeros. The construction of the printwheels and stereotype wheel punches indicates
that suppressing leading zeros in the printed
hardcopy was clearly not intended. Replacing
wheel punches with blank spacers is possible
but not practical, and it is likely that leading
zeros would have been cut or machined off the
printing plate after it was cast.

July–September 2005

85

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

machine’s full digit capacity between the argument and result, contributes to the debate
about the apparently extravagant digit precision of Babbage’s designs: The full digit capacity may not have been intended only for the
results.

Conclusion

Figure 8. Experimental stereotype mold in plaster of paris. Detail.
(Photo courtesy of the Science Museum, London.)

Close contact with the practical procedures
for stereotyping gave suggestive insights into
issues that had remained puzzling. One such
was the question of why Babbage’s designs
showed engines working to so many digits of
precision.28 Faced with the practical task of
stereotyping a run of calculations raised the
question of how the argument would be tabulated. If the full 30 digits are used in the printed result, then generating the argument
requires a separate run using only one difference to increment each next value. The tabulated argument would then later have to be
matched to the separately tabulated results at
the stage of making the printing plates.
A feature of the machine is that the calculating section can be split horizontally to isolate upper and lower sections. This is done by
disabling the carriage of tens at any digit position on each of the eight columns of figure
wheels. The manual adjustment to do this is
simple and takes only a moment. Separate calculations can then be carried out in each of the
isolated sections with the 30 digits apportioned
between the two sections at will. So one section
of the machine can perform the tabulation of
a polynomial function of up to the seventh
order, and a separate section can tabulate the
argument using only one difference to progressively increment the argument. The argument and result both occupy the last column
of the engine and are automatically printed
and stereotyped on the same line alongside
each other (see Figures 7 and 8).
Generating the argument and the result in
the same calculation run, by distributing the

86

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

The successful construction of the engine
was instructive in furthering historical understanding of Babbage’s capabilities and achievements. Constructing the machine revealed
features and subtleties that had not been fully
appreciated through analysis of archival
sources. Moreover, the fact that the machine
works without material modification to the
original drawings vindicates Babbage as a
designer of the highest caliber. The meaning
and value of the machine, both historical and
technical, are far from exhausted: the existence
of a complete and working Babbage tabulating
engine offers an opportunity to further explore
automatic tabulation as practiced in the 19th
century and to acquire operational know-how
inaccessible by nonempirical means.
The physical artifact—large, intricate, and
imposing—serves to memorialize Babbage as
the great ancestral figure in the history of computing, and in this it achieves the purpose of its
construction as articulated by Allan Bromley in
1985. The engine rounds off a historical narrative. The successful construction of the
machine closes an anguished chapter in computer pre-history: The Science Museum is a
government institution funded from the
Treasury, and the original deal between the
government and Babbage to fund his machine
to completion has finally been fulfilled.
The sumptuous spectacle of the machine in
operation is an arresting sight. The act of witnessing the startling choreography of its moving parts and the clanking synchrony of its
motion prompt us to experience the promise of
a future already past.29 Objects are interpreted
and reinterpreted by successive generations.
Others will find other meanings.

Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge the Science
Museum for providing the context and environment for undertaking the project to construct Babbage’s calculating engine. Special
thanks to two Science Museum directors in
whose tenures this project fell: Margaret
Weston, who encouraged and financially supported the late Allan Bromley’s pioneering work
on Babbage’s engine designs, and Neil Cossons,
who spiritedly backed the project to construct

the engine at critical points in its eventful trajectory, despite the risks. Generous financial
support was provided by ICL, Unisys, HewlettPackard, Rank Xerox, and Siemens Nixdorf for
the construction of the calculating section completed in 1991. Tom Bales, director of Symbiosis
Foundation, funded the preparation of the
drawings for the printing and stereotyping
apparatus. Special thanks to Nathan Myhrvold
for generously funding the construction of the
printing and stereotype apparatus completed in
2002, as well as a complete replica engine, and
for his good-humored patience awaiting the
outcome. Most of the illustrations were photographed by David Exton.

References and notes
1. A. Hyman, Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer, Oxford Univ. Press, 1982, pp. 124-131; D.
Swade, The Cogwheel Brain: Charles Babbage and
the Quest to Build the First Computer, 2000, Little,
Brown (published in the US as The Difference
Engine: Charles Babbage and the Quest to Build the
First Computer, Viking, 2001, pp. 65-71).
2. A.G. Bromley, “The Evolution of Babbage’s Calculating Engines,” Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 9, no. 2, 1987, pp. 113-136.
3. The quoted phrase is Henry Prevost’s. See H.P.
Babbage, ed., Babbage’s Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers by Henry Prevost Babbage, E. and
F.N. Spon, 1889, preface. (Reprinted in The
Charles Babbage Institute Reprint Series for the History of Computing. vol. 2, Tomash Publishers, 1982.
For historical evolution of Babbage’s ideas, see B.
Collier, The Little Engines that Could’ve: The Calculating Engines of Charles Babbage, Garland, 1990.
4. For a detailed technical description of the Analytical Engine, see A.G. Bromley, “Charles Babbage’s
Analytical Engine, 1838,” Annals of the History of
Computing, vol. 4, no. 3, 1982, pp. 196-217
(reprinted in 1998, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 29-45).
Also see A.G. Bromley, “Babbage’s Analytical
Engine Plans 28 and 28a—The Programmer’s
Interface,” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing,
vol. 22, no. 4, 2000, pp. 4-19.
5. Collier, The Little Engines that Could’ve, p. 211;
also see A.G. Bromley, The Babbage Papers in the
Science Museum: A Cross-Referenced List, Science
Museum, London, 1991, p. 11.
6. Science Museum Library Babbage Papers , drawing BAB [A] 99, “Rough sketch of an element of a
Difference Engine and method of Carrying Consecutively,” 1 March 1842.
7. C. Babbage, The Exposition of 1851 or Views on
the Industry, the Science, and the Government of
England, 2nd ed., 1851; M. Campbell-Kelly, ed.,
The Works of Charles Babbage, vol. 10, William
Pickering, 1989, p. 108.

8. C. Babbage to Lord Derby, 8 June 1852, quoted
in C. Babbage, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher, Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts &
Green, 1864, p. 104.
9. For quoted phrase see Babbage, Passages from
the Life, p. 114. For a technical description of the
anticipating carriage mechanism, see A.G. Bromley, “Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine, 1838,”
Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 4, no. 3,
1982, p. 202 and the following.
10. Babbage, Passages, p. 97.
11. Science Museum Library Babbage Papers , drawing BAB [A] 166, “Apparatus for moving Stereotype frames for Analytical & Difference Engines,”
undated.
12. Babbage, Passages, p. 107. See also p. 106 for
reference to “imagined obligation.”
13. Science Museum Registered File, ScM 2004/46/5
pt. 1, “Babbage Difference Engine No. 2: Project
Correspondence.” File Note recording first
action, 7 Nov. 1986.
14. For the listing, see Bromley, The Babbage Papers,
1991, pp. A-13 to B-3.
15. There are two drafts. The first is dated 13 June
1985. The second is a slightly expanded version
dated 27 March 1987; Science Museum
Registered File, ScM 2004/46/19, “Babbage Difference Engine Project: Correspondence with Dr.
A. Bromley.”
16. For a comprehensive description, see D. Swade,
Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2: Technical Description, Science Museum Papers in the
History of Technology, Science Museum, London,
1996.
17. Science Museum Library Babbage Papers, drawing BAB [A] 172, “End View of Inking Printing
Paper and Stereotype Apparatus,” undated.
18. A. Bromley to M. Weston, 20 May 1985, Science
Museum Registered File, ScM 2004/46/19.
19. For a fuller narrative account of the trial piece,
see Swade, Cogwheel Brain, chapter 13.
20. For details of composition analysis see Science
Museum Registered File, ScM 2004/46/29, “Babbage DE2: Technical Notes.”
21. For a fuller narrative account of the build (excluding the output apparatus), see Swade, Cogwheel
Brain, Part III, pp. 221-318.
22. For cam profile details, see the Science Museum
Library Babbage Papers, drawing BAB [A] 169,
“Plan of Cams for Odd Difference Figure Wheels
and for Vertical motion of Even Difference
warning.”
23. I am indebted to Eiiti Wada for this analogy. Personal communication, Tokyo, 24 July 1998.
24. See Swade, Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine
No. 2, 1996, pp. 70-71.
25. C. Babbage, On the Mathematical Powers of the
Calculating Engine, 1837; M. Campbell-Kelly, ed.,

July–September 2005

87

Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine No. 2

The Works of Charles Babbage, vol. 3, William
Pickering, 1989, p. 39.
26. M. Lindgren, Glory and Failure: The Difference
Engines of Johann Muller, Charles Babbage, and
Georg and Edvard Scheutz, 2nd ed., MIT Press,
1990.
27. Based on the earlier Analytical Engine designs,
Bromley first estimated the speed of calculation
for Difference Engine No. 2 at one result every
7 seconds. He later amended this to 3.5
seconds. See Ref. 15.
28. For discussion of digit precision in the context of
contemporary table-making, see D. Swade, Calculation and Tabulation in the 19th Century: Airy versus Babbage, doctoral dissertation, 2003, Univ.
College London. For a summary account and use
of Difference Engine No. 2, see D. Swade, “The
‘Unerring Certainty of Mechanical Agency’”:
Machines and Table Making in the Nineteenth
Century,” The History of Mathematical Tables: From
Sumer to Spreadsheets, M. Campbell-Kelly et al.,
ed., Oxford Univ. Press, 2003, pp. 143-174.
29. F. Spufford, “The Difference Engine and The Difference Engine,” Cultural Babbage: Technology,
Time and Invention, F. Spufford and J. Uglow,
eds., Faber and Faber, 1996.

88

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

Doron D. Swade is Visiting
Professor (Interaction Design)
at the Royal College of Art,
London. Until 2002 he was
assistant director and head of
collections at the Science
Museum, London. From 1985
to 1999, he was the Science
Museum’s senior curator of computing. Previously,
he designed electronics and computer-based hardware for museum exhibits and consulted for the
microcomputer industry in the UK and US. He has a
BSc in electronics engineering and physics, an MSc
in control engineering, and a PhD in the history of
19th-century calculating machines. His most recent
book is The Difference Engine: Charles Babbage and the
Quest to Build the First Computer (Viking, 2001).

Readers may contact Swade about this article at
doron.swade@blueyonder.co.uk.

For further information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our Digital Library at
http://www.computer.org/publications/dlib.

